MARIJUANA
SMOKEr’s
GUIDEBOOK
  The Easy Way to
 Identify and Enjoy
 Marijuana Strains




    matt mernagh
MARIJUANA
SMOKEr’s
GUIDEBOOK
  The Easy Way to
 Identify and Enjoy
 Marijuana Strains
    matt mernagh




    Green Candy Press
                               MARIJUANA SMOKER’S GUIDEBOOK
                               Published by Green Candy Press
                               San Francisco, CA

                               Copyright © 2013 Matt Mernagh

                               ISBN 978-1-937866-07-5

                               This book contains information about illegal substances,
                               specifically the plant Cannabis Sativa and its derivative
                               products. Green Candy Press would like to emphasize that
                               cannabis is a controlled substance in North America and
                               throughout much of the world. As such, the use and
                               cultivation of cannabis can carry heavy penalties that may
                               threaten an individual’s liberty and livelihood.


                               The aim of the Publisher is to educate and entertain.
                               Whatever the Publisher’s view on the validity of current
                               legislation, we do not in any way condone the use of
                               prohibited substances.


                               All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
                               reproduced in any form without express written
                               permission from the Publisher, except by a reviewer, who
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               may quote brief passages or reproduce illustrations in a
                               review where appropriate credit is given. Nor may any
                               part of this book be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
                               system, or transmitted in any form or by any means without
                               written permission from the Publisher.
  CONTENTS.




Introduction ......... .......1   Blue Satellite............. .38
                                  Blue Widow .............. .39
Acapulco Gold ...... .....19      Blueberry ................ .40
Acid .................. .....20   Blueberry Hashplant.... .41
Afghani....................21     Blueberry Haze.......... .42
Afghani Bullrider.........22      Blueberry Kush.......... .43
Alien Dawg ...............24      Blueberry OG Kush ..... . 44
Alien Kush ........... .....25    Bubba Kush .............. .45
Ambrosia..................26      Bubble Assault .......... .46
Amsterdam Cheese...... 27         Bubblegum .............. .47
Apollo 11 .................28     Cannalope Haze......... .49
Apollo Snow ..............29      Cataract Kush............ .50
Atomic Haze ..............30      Champagne ............. .51
BC Mango............ .....32      Cheese ................... .52
Berry Craze...............33      Cheese Cake ............ .53
Big Buddha Cheese ...... 34       ChemDawg .............. .55
Black Domina........ .....35      Cherry x AK-47.......... .56
Blackberry........... .....36     Chocolate Thai .......... .57
Blue Hawaiian ............37      Chocolope ............... .58
 contents.




Chronic ...................59    Great White Shark....... .85
Chronic Ryder....... .....60     Green Crack............. .86
Cinderella 99 .............62    Green Harvest ........... .88
Cindy 99 ..................63    Headband................ .91
Cripple Creek............64      Health Canada........... .92
Critical +..................65   Hindu Kush............... .93
Critical Haze..............66    Honey Bee ............... .94
Critical Yumbolt ..........67    Ice Cream................ .97
Crush......................68    Ice Kush .................. .98
Crystal Moon .............69     Island Sweet Skunk ..... 100
Deadhead Kush ..... .....71      Jack Flash ................103
Deep Purple ......... .....73    Jack Herer ...............104
Exodus Cheese...... .....75      Jack Jean Guy ...........106
Fruit Defendu.............77     Jack Skunk...............107
Grand Daddy Purple..... 79       Jas Bud ...................108
Grape God........... .....80     Jorge Cervantes’
Grape God Kush .... .....81        Diamonds..............109
Grapefruit.................83    Juicy Fruit................110
Grapefruit Diesel ........84     Justin Bieber Kush ......111
                                contents.




                               K-Train ...................114    Nebula ..................139
                               King’s Purple ............115     Northern Satellite.......140
                               Kish .................. ....116   Nouveau Kush ...........141
                               Kushberry ........... ....117     Nuken ....................142
                               L.S.D. ................ ....119   OG Kush .................144
                               LA Confidential .........120      OG Raskal ...............145
                               Lavender Kush ..........122       OG Star ..................146
                               Legends Ultimate                  OG-18....................147
                                 Indica ..................123    OGiesel .................148
                               Lemon Amnesia.........124         Orangina ................149
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               Lemon Kush .............125       P Dawg...................151
                               Lilac Kush............ ....126    Papaya ...................152
                               M39 .................. ....128    Pink Kush ................153
                               Mango ............... ....129     Plain Ole Kush...........154
                               Master Kush .............131      Purple D .................155
                               Max OG Kush ....... ....132       Purple Diamond ........156
                               Medi Kush ...............133      Purple God ..............157
                               Medi Saint ...............134     Purple Kush .............158
                               Ménage-à-trois...... ....135      Quasar ...................161
                               Mountain Top............136       Red Dragon..............163
                               Mr. Nice x Blueberry ... 137      Rhazer ...................164
Rhino Kush .......... ....165     Trainwreck ..............193
Rock Star ............ ....166    Tropicanna ..............194
Russian Rocket Fuel ....169       UK Cheese...............196
SAGE................. ....171     Ultimate Indica..........197
Sensi Star ............ ....172   Ultra Kush................198
Shark Shock .............174      Ultra Skunk ..............199
Skunk #1.................175      Vanilla Kush .............201
Sour Cream.......... ....176      Viper.....................202
Sour Diesel                       Wappa ...................205
 x Purple Urkle.........177       Watermelon .............206
Sour Diesel                       White Bubblegum ......207
 x Thai Tanic........ ....178     White Dwarf .............208
Sour Tang ............ ....179    White Rhino .............209
Spoetnik 1 ........... ....180    White Russian ...........210
Sweet Deep Grapefruit..183        White Widow ............212
Sweet Tooth ......... ....184     Willy Jack ................214
Syrup ....................185     Yoda......................216
Thai Tanic................187
The Hog .................188
The Purps................190
The Real HP .............191
 introduction.

Smoking Pot 101
I toked them all...
matt mernagh


…and I probably should have known better than to at-
tempt to write a lengthy introduction to this book after in-
haling a devastating indica like Exodus Cheese. After a
lengthy toking career you’d think I’d know better, but
here I am, with my guide to smoking the world’s best pot
hung up just before hitting the press because I’ve chosen
the wrong weed. Gawd damn! Indicas are great at man-
aging my chronic pain levels, but they zap the creativity
out of me. Unless I switch it up to a soaring creative sativa,
I’m doomed to stare at a blank page, and so are you.

Marijuana and writing have been part of my daily rou-
tine for two decades. Combining the two to create a
ganja guide seems like a dream writing gig until one
day, you begin to struggle with words after hitting a
Kush. Toking multiple Kushes and thinking creatively?
Forget about it. Writing that a strain is “dank” one too
many times is akin to a music critic writing, “It rocks!”
for every song on an album. Just not okay.

Towards the end of this book-writing process, after sam-
pling and reviewing hundreds of samples of amazing
weed (and tending to my own my cannabis crops), I
began appearing at my local pub with a ‘long day at the

                              1
                                introduction .
                               office’ look. Yes, I sampled (and smell like) five different
                               kinds of marijuana today, but I also penned thousands of
                               words describing the smells, tastes and effects of what I
                               smoked. Just like any professional critic, I take my craft
                               seriously–I reached back into my writer’s bag of tricks
                               to my days of being a young, ranting music reviewer and
                               applied many of those techniques to the art of reviewing
                               marijuana strains.

                               Instead of reviewing marijuana objectively, I completely
                               and wholeheartedly admit to getting medicated and writ-
                               ing subjective reviews. Marijuana strains from the White
                               family are my personal favorites, so I’m bound to be influ-
                               enced by my adoration of White Russian, White Widow and
                               Jean Guy. However, I love stellar soaring sativas, especially
                               in the morning, while afternoons often bring fruity flavored
                               hybrids and of course the well-loved Kush strains.

                               Can cannabis ever be reviewed objectively when there are
                               so many variables involved in producing truly great fin-
                               ished bud? The same strain grown by two different people
                               will ultimately have similar, but notably different, results. Be-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               sides using totally different methods–soil or hydro, chemical
                               nutrients or organic plant food, etc.–there’s a personal
                               growing style that influences the way the plant grows in
                               these different systems. In short, no two buds are truly alike.

                               The breeder’s seeds play a significant role too, but how
                               much? There are plenty of well-known strains available
                               that when grown from seed produce at least two differ-
                               ent phenotypes–groups of observable characteristics,
                               like smell, taste and effects. Some breeders inform buy-
                               ers that either of these phenotypes can appear in their

                                                              2
grow, while others don’t. Subtle differences will create
different impressions of a strain.

So when we write about pot, are we judging the strain or
the grower–or both? It seems to me that the best method
to examine marijuana strain is subjectively–and this
doesn’t mean writing, “It’s super DANK” or, “This strain is
FIRE, bro” a hundred and fifty times.


I toked them all and this is
what I thought about them!
There’s not a published article, going all the way back to
my beginnings as a music geek for Exclaim Magazine, that
hasn’t been written while I’ve been under the influence of
some wicked weed. That’s because without cannabis I’m

                             3
                                introduction .
                               unable to sit comfortably in a chair and write these words.
                               Medical marijuana allows me to function. Inhaling responsi-
                               bly, I’ve obtained a Humber School for Writers diploma and
                               a journalism diploma from St. Clair College, penned articles
                               for Toronto alt-weekly NOW Magazine as well as Cannabis
                               Culture magazine and I’ve made several appearances on
                               Newstalk1010, an influential news radio station in Toronto.

                               Marijuana manages my fibromyalgia, scoliosis and a rare
                               brain tumor behind my left ear better than any prescrip-
                               tion medication on the market. I can function like a normal
                               human with medical cannabis, whereas seizure and opiate
                               medications render me blah. In 1997 I joined a then-fledg-
                               ling organization called the Toronto Compassion Centre. It
                               helped people to obtain high quality cannabis to treat
                               their illnesses. When Toronto Police raided the feisty or-
                               ganization in 2002, I came out of the cannabis closet and
                               began my personal quest to overgrow the government.

                               As the coach of a group of activists known as the Toronto
                               Hash Mob, I’ve led and organized almost a decade’s worth
                               of marijuana smoke outs. We risk arrest every April 20th
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               by publicly puffing down with friends. Now we have grown




                                                            4
into a sizeable crowd of thousands of tokers. Our celebra-
tory cannabis cannon (about a quarter pound in one
super-sized joint) has led to my photo being splashed in
newspapers all the way around the world. I’ve appeared in
print and on television numerous times in my legal med-
ical marijuana garden. It’s fair to say that cannabis has
given me a quality of life I could not have had without it.

However, it hasn’t been all ganja gravy. I’ve been charged
for a cannabis-related offence on five separate occasions,
did two weeks in Canada’s most notorious prison The
Don Jail and I’ve spent five of the last seven years on bail.
Yet even in these bleak moments there’s some cannabis
clarity–like when a justice proclaimed during a bail hear-
ing, “That must be the largest balcony in the city”, after
learning I had placed 32 plants outside to see how they
would grow 420 feet above the city of Toronto.

                             5
                               My so-called “confession video” (don’t ever make one of
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               these) shows me explaining to an inquiring detective,
                               who claimed to have busted plenty of grows before but
                               had never seen anyone label their pots, the difference
                               between indicas, sativas and hybrids. The labels allowed
                               me to keep track of the different strains that I confessed
                               to growing for myself to determine which ones worked
                               (and which ones didn’t work) at treating my illness.

                               Turning my worst moment into my best took four years
                               of monthly court sessions and a thirteen-day trial. Our
                               four months of preparation, wherein lawyer Paul Lewin

                                                           6
and I interviewed people across Canada about their in-
ability to access the federal government’s medical mari-
juana program, resulted in the largest victory against
prohibition ever achieved. Together (myself, 22 wit-
nesses and our lawyer Paul), we struck down Canada’s
marijuana laws for personal possession and growing.

I am currently the only Canadian who has a court order
allowing me to possess and grow cannabis. In the last
year and a half, I’ve grown multiple marijuana strains by
a slew of reputable seed breeders and it’s been a re-
markable experience.

Many of the strains in this toker’s guide were grown by
myself or other medical marijuana users. Plenty were
picked up at various medical marijuana centers from
across the country and others from known quality deal-
ers. Obtaining or growing strains wasn’t a real chal-
lenge, but writing about and photographing 150
different buds turned out to be tough!

I hope that this guide will help other marijuana users to
learn about the smells, tastes and effects of the most




                            7
                                introduction .
                               popular and effective strains of pot that are available
                               today. I also hope that this guide will teach marijuana
                               users how to identify the quality and genetic nature of
                               the cannabis that they are purchasing or growing. After
                               all, no one likes to smoke bad shit.

                               How Can You Tell If You
                               Have Stellar Weed?

                               If your buds are crushed and crammed into a small
                               baggy, then they’re not going to be great. Plastics de-
                               grade cannabis. Static cling in the baggy can pull pre-
                               cious trichomes off the buds and on to the plastic walls of
                               your baggies. A sticky bag is terrible news for a smoker,
                               because by the time you get at the bud, all that ganja
                               goodness has gone to waste. To avoid this, keep your
                               buds in a small glass jar that seals in the pot’s freshness.

                               Marijuana doesn’t naturally come compressed in bricks,
                               nor is it crumbly or broken up in pieces. Buds should be
                               attractive to the point of being pornographic to potheads.
                               Your first thoughts when encountering stellar weed should
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               be, “I can’t wait to roll you up and toke you all night long.”




                                                             8
Great ganja is gorgeous be-
cause its trichomes sparkle. The
red, green and sometimes pur-
ple hues are majestic and the
leafy material has been prop-
erly manicured. Properly cured
buds are dense, firm and, most im-
portantly, easy to grind. Once ground, all that remains
is a sweet, sticky, and resinous mound of marijuana.

Besides being pretty, stellar nugs have a noticeable
stink. Some will have a more noticeable stench than oth-
ers, but all should have a smell. When busted, each par-
ticular marijuana strain’s unique aroma will become
very noticeable. I’ve had some strains that, after getting
busted, released a smell that made my mouth water.

How To Tell Quickly If Your Dealer Is
Selling Great Ganja Or Bunk Bud

Don’t buy your bud on a street corner. Instead, develop
a trusted nug network. Develop a reputation for having
dank nugs and you will soon discover that your access to
amazing strains increases. Potheads who have great
ganja like sticking together because it makes the ses-
sion that much more stoney.

Regardless of all the other arguments, marijuana should
be legal simply because phoning half a dozen people on
a Friday night seeking some pot to get stoned with is just
wrong. How many calls of, “You got any trees?” do you
have to make before marijuana legalization just makes
sense? Plenty of people have a regular hook up, but even
that person might not truly be worthy of their business.

                             9
                                introduction .
                               Did your weed come pre-packaged or in small dime
                               bags? Then it’s bunk for sure. Avoid the dealer who has
                               everything pre-arranged and packaged. A reputable
                               seller will weigh out their wares on a scale in front of you
                               and be very proud of their product. Many will be very
                               boastful of their buds. Stick to your regular hook up when
                               buying large amounts, and when purchasing from some-
                               one new, buy less to test their product and reputation.

                               Just because your guy says he’s stocking “the Kush”
                               doesn’t mean it really is “the Kush”. Stay cautious of the
                               person who says they have super bomb strain x-y-z, but
                               why not give them the benefit of the doubt, especially if
                               it’s awesome pot and matches up with this guide?

                               How To Tell If Your Marijuana Has Mold

                               Contrary to popular fear mongering, mold will not kill you,
                               but still, you should never consume cannabis that you know
                               is moldy. For prohibitionists, mold is the new blob; a magi-
                               cal and deadly monster that no one can see or knows much
                               about, but which can kill unsuspecting teens. However, in
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               reality, mold is just a problem created by moisture lock.




                                                            10
When moist marijuana is packed in airtight containers
the conditions to create mold are perfect. Most growers
cure their cannabis correctly, but when they don’t, con-
sumers get moldy products.

Be on the lookout for a white stringy substance that
clings to buds around the stems. If you spot something
that doesn’t look like marijuana plant matter then it
probably isn’t. Bust open the suspected area and more
white gunk should be apparent. Some mold appears as
black spots on your buds, but I’ve found the most com-
mon to be a white mildew-like substance that clearly is
not cannabis. Discard any affected plant matter immedi-
ately and be thankful that shit isn’t in your lungs.

How To Tell If Your Marijuana Has
Been Sprayed For Taste Or Weight

Some professional potheads are known to lightly lick their
bud at the base of the stem to determine if it’s been
sprayed to improve taste and weight. Some growers and
dealers will spray sugary or salty solutions on to their bud
to make it weigh more, and therefore make more money
off it. Beware of this ganja garbage. It’s out there. When
smoking tasty sprayed weed you’re going to notice an un-
real or flavored rolling paper or blunt wrap-like taste–es-
pecially if you’re vaporizing. Experienced heads will know
instantly that it’s not natural and it doesn’t take much for
you to know either. Dealers spraying cannabis for taste

                             11
                                introduction .
                               and weight should be frog marched to city hall and put in
                               stocks to be publicly ridiculed by potheads everywhere.

                               How To Tell If You Have An
                               Indica or Sativa Before You Smoke It

                               If it looks like the Kush, it’s probably an indica. Deter-
                               mining if it’s an indica or a sativa before toking a strain
                               is a huge cannabis challenge. Hybrids have made char-
                               acteristics between indicas and sativas very blurred. It’s
                               much easier to tell the difference between indica and
                               sativa when they’re still growing because the character-
                               istics are more pronounced in the living plant.

                               However, most of the marijuana
                               you’ll come across will be an
                               indica-dominant hybrid that
                               creates a sedate kind of stone.
                               This is because most cultivators
                               agree that indicas are easier to
                               grow and are faster finishing. Generally
                               speaking, indicas are fatter, denser and smell less
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               exotic. Most indicas won’t stink up a room when the stash
                               jar is open. Sativas are leaner looking and can be slightly
                               wispy but will stink up a room real good when grown cor-
                               rectly. Remember that because hybrids have become so
                               commonplace, the best way to tell is to sample the weed.

                               How To Moderate Your Cannabis Consumption

                               Good luck with that. When you have fantastic cannabis,
                               moderating how much you’re toking can be a challenge.
                               However, staff at a BYOB (bring your own bud) lounge

                                                            12
called Vapor Central sometimes do
have to clean up puke after tokers
have over indulged. Generally
speaking, alcohol plays a role, but
not always. Sometimes–and it is
very rare, thankfully–people do get
so stoned that they vomit.

New potheads especially can easily get overwhelmed on
weed, but that’s part of the fun. Remember that you’re not
going to die. It’s best to take deep breaths, drink some
juice and make yourself comfortable because your setting
plays an important role in the experience. Stoners have
been known to leave Vapor Central much more ripped
than they thought after getting up from a couch and going
outside because their setting has changed. Take things
easy and slow, and don’t run for the hills!

Take the time to enjoy your cannabis. Inhale some then
kick back and wait for the effects before going further.
On nights when you’re going full bud bore, put out a va-
riety of munchies in advance to keep yourself well fed.
Try to avoid just the junk food, too.

Experienced folks should never put new tokers one toke
over the line intentionally as that’s just bad form–we are
classy cannabis lovers over here, after all. It’s not a
reefer race nor is inhaling the most marijuana some
kind of cannabis contest. Our foremost goal is to derive
the maximum enjoyment and benefits from our ganja.

How To Tell If You”ve Got Indoor Or
Outdoor Grown Grass

In my experience, I have seen that indoor trichomes are

                           13
                                introduction .
                               fatter and more plump, whereas outdoor weed is more
                               hairy and rough looking. Outdoor cannabis has a
                               rougher appearance than indoor cannabis because it’s
                               been subject to harsher conditions. I’ve been accused of
                               babying my marijuana plants in my indoor grow room
                               because I once adjusted a fan speed after a friend de-
                               cided it was “a little too low.” Who does that? Come on!

                               How To Tell If You Have Organically Or
                               Chemically Fed Marijuana

                               Unless you grow it yourself or know the grower person-
                               ally, finding organic marijuana can be a real cannabis
                               challenge. Some medical marijuana centers offer organi-
                               cally grown grass, but few do. Even Amsterdam cof-
                               feeshops don’t have much in the way of bio cannabis.
                               Most cannabis will be fed some kind of chemical nutrient
                               and then flushed of these nutrients in the final weeks of
                               flowering. Growing organically has become much easier,
                               but I doubt commercial growers are going to change
                               their methods from using chemical plant foods. Regard-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                                                          14
less, it’s all in how the cannabis has been flushed. Poorly
flushed organic marijuana is going to produce results
that are just as bad. Your marijuana should leave behind
a nice white ash in your bowl or ashtray if it’s free from
the nasty shit.

How To Tell How Potent
Your Cannabis Is

Smoke it, duh! On first inspection you might have potent
pot if it is sticky with resin, packed with glittering tri-
chomes and dusted with cannabis crystals. Stinky
cannabis can also be a sign that you’re about to get
higher than the proverbial kite. However, even the most
beautiful buds can be a huge disappointment when you
smoke them. Some strains given advance hype never
live up to their reputation for potency. Use the wise
weed words of others, but don’t just rely on the name of
the nug to determine its potency.

Advice For My Medical Marijuana Friends

Accessing a variety of affordable strains is exceedingly
important when medicating with marijuana. To receive the
most benefit from med buds, patients need to know what
they’re medicating with. Various strains provide different
effects and some may provide better relief than others,
but other than strong anecdotal evidence we don’t
know much about how certain strains affect var-
ious ailments. Contrary to what some people
may pitch to medical patients, every
cannabis strain affects people differently
and you need to experiment in order to
determine what kind of pot is best
for alleviating your symptoms.

                            15
                                introduction .
                               I’m wary of recommending one strain over another be-
                               cause the ultimate benefactor is the breeder and what
                               works for me might not work for you. There’s an honest
                               statement! Medical marijuana center staff can, of course,
                               direct their patients to specific strains based on the re-
                               ports of patients with similar afflictions. However, I’m not
                               sure if this really extends beyond their own medical mari-
                               juana menu. Given the subtle nuances of growing
                               cannabis, patients need to learn to recognize not only the
                               strains that help their condition but also the growers and
                               production methods that produce the cannabis that they
                               prefer. Knowledge is power.

                               White strains work for my fibromyalgia because they
                               provide pain relief without making me sleepy. I’m not
                               sure if there’s something extra special in these strains or
                               if I get a really pleasant placebo effect. Either way, it
                               doesn’t really matter because ultimately I’m getting the
                               symptom relief that I need.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                                                           16
The goal of medical mari-
juana patients is symptom relief and we
don’t really require anything more than anecdotal evi-
dence for our own personal medical marijuana discover-
ies. My guide mentions many strains that are effective for
pain relief and I hope that it can work for many as a start-
ing point on their journey towards being a ganja guru ca-
pable of identifying and enjoying great marijuana.


 acknowledgments.
Hash Mob Honor Roll

Christina Moorshead, Erin & Chris Goodwin, Mann,
Mark Klokeid, Matt Oliver, Sean Brady, Paul Lewin (and
The 22 witnesses in R v. Mernagh), Sita Windheim, Tracy
Curley, Adam Glover, Daniel Boughen, Martin Legabbe,
Heather Parry, Dave Unrau, Eric Compton, Adam Green-
blatt, Dana Larsen, Jeremiah Vandermeer, Michael Mage,
Steve “Wanna A Dab Matt?” Hunter, Sarah Sunday, Jillian
Hollander, The Weedy Guy, Amy Anonymous, Bud Can-
nibus, Compton, Potato Pipe, Jack Draack, Yoda, Mon-
treal Martin, Opus420, and The Potheads Who Don’t
Smoke Schwag, Head Shop Canada, iMedikate, Toronto
Compassion Centre, Cannabis As Living Medicine, Rain-
bow Medicinal Cannabis, Green Harvest, Pixel Dreams,
The Jim Richards Show (and Britt), Cannabis Culture and
of course Vapor Central.

                            17
A
                                                               A




 Acapulco Gold.
Along with Skunk #1 and Northern Lights, Acapulco Gold
was one of the first consistently popular marijuana
strains. You can still find these strains, but they’re no
longer imported like they were “back in the day.” Sea-
soned tokers who experienced Acapulco Gold in their
youth may tear up or experience an emotional flashback
when toking these nugs. During the ‘70s Acapulco Gold
was imported from Mexico, but my sample of this zippy
soaring sativa arrived from growers in Canada’s prairie
province, Saskatchewan. The alert, active high is well bal-
anced with a wonderful body relaxation experience.
However, too much of a sativa strain like Acapulco Gold
can make some people paranoid. The high of this strain is
a slow ride upwards, which makes it a great social stone
and because it’s not a fast acting sativa it won’t cause too
much jitteriness after a session. After blazing a joint or
doing a bong rip, you might want to get stuff done around
your home or go outside and enjoy the day. You can for
sure count on not sitting around or even sitting still.

                            19
A
                                Acid.
                               Some enthusiasts avoid poorly branded strains such as
                               Acid on pothead principal. I’m not sure why it’s labeled
                               after an hallucinogen, but some people dislike Acid for
                               the same reasons that they dislike Green Crack. Paradise
                               Seeds’ Acid doesn’t have much of a trippy effect or
                               aroma, but it does have an explosive scorching taste. A
                               fuel-like flavor from the Diesel parentage rolls over your
                               taste buds something fierce. It’s not as fuel-tinged as
                               ChemDawg or NYC Diesel, but Acid does have a power-
                               ful bite. The chunky buds are light green with pinkish




                               trichomes and produce a rich, dense vapor or smoke.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               You should anticipate an uplifting happy high. People
                               suffering from depression will love its positive vibe, as
                               Acid is truly mood enhancing marijuana that will put a
                               perma-grin on your face for a considerable length of
                               time. Just sit back and smile.




                                                           20
                                                              A




 Afghani .
These gooey buds are bursting with robust earth tones.
Afghani nugs will be loaded down with heavenly smooth
flavors, but will cause a cough ranging somewhere from
a lung tickle to a harsh hack. Afghani is an exceedingly
sticky strain that creates especially messy joints. Resin
dripped out of my joint and ran into the palm of my
hand; a small river of orange goo. Obviously, due to this,
Afghani is an ideal hash maker. Recreational and med-
ical smokers will really love its powerful narcotic effect,
as it has an incredible amount of pain relieving proper-
ties that brought my pain levels down dramatically. How-
ever, it did leave me cloudy-headed or, if you like,
stoned to the bone. Afghani is best before bed or on
days when the pain is off the charts and you have noth-
ing else to do but kick back and be gunned on ganja all
day. The resinous, hashish-flavored Afghani buds create
a powerful full body stone that plants you deep into the
earth. You’re going to put roots down in your session
space. I know I did.

                            21
A




                                Afghani Bullrider.
                               A west coast legend, Afghani Bullrider would be loved by
                               enthusiasts if they could find it as easily as Kush. Dense
                               AB buds will not release their beautiful silken hashish
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               aroma until busted, but then they stink up a room some-
                               thing fierce with an exceedingly pleasant exotic, erotic
                               smell. Afghani Bullrider produces an awesome and ex-
                               travagant hardy toke. The flavor has plenty of depth to it,
                               and its smooth, earthy tones blend perfectly with the
                               hash-y taste. Afghani Bullrider pain relief is top notch
                               without too much of a mental thud. I didn’t lose my mental
                               focus after a session. It made sitting in a chair much eas-
                               ier to the point where I was glued to my office chair hap-
                               pily getting tasks done. It is an excellent couch-locker
                               with long lasting effects, stellar taste, stone and aroma.

                                                           22
A
A




                                Alien Dawg .
                               Alien Dawg is a heavy indica without much distinguish-
                               able odor. The Cali Connection has bred their landrace
                               Afghani (referred to as Alien Technology) with Chem-
                               Dawg, and the stone definitely takes after the Afghani,
                               providing a very sedate, heavy, couch-locking indica ef-
                               fect. Its lack of smell can be easily overlooked because it
                               has a deadly taste and buzz. If you’re lucky you will catch
                               a whiff of a flat, earthy Afghani aroma, but don’t be sur-
                               prised if you don’t smell anything at all. The smoke starts
                               out very hash-y, then becomes an acidic bite. The won-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               derful Chem-style bite lingers while you’re comfortably
                               numb; exactly what you would expect given its ganja ge-
                               netics. This makes Alien Dawg a great choice for people
                               with chronic pain problems. The sleepy quality is won-
                               derful late at night, meaning this strain has two fantastic
                               medicinal marijuana traits. Alien Dawg’s taste is purely
                               from the ChemDawg lineage, and combined with the ef-
                               fects, it’s perfect for an after dinner, “got-nothing-to-do-
                               but-kick-back-and-unwind-after-a-difficult-day” session.
                               Resistance to its overpowering downward effects will be
                               futile. It’s totally toking out of this world.

                                                            24
                                                              A
 Alien Kush.
Alien Kush’s toke must be from another planet. Kush ge-
netics have been treated with some extraterrestrial wiz-
ardry to create this stoner standout. It has a wonderful
down-to-earth taste and a vibe that is somewhere be-
tween Hindu Kush and Purple Kush. Anticipate spacing
out for a few hours and losing track of time, just as if
you’ve been abducted. It’s Alien Kush’s best feature:
suddenly you’re jolted from your spaciness wondering
where the last two or three hours went. Did I just sit here
staring off at the walls listening to my own voice or did
aliens beam me up to their fantastical spaceship and
test my cannabinoid levels? Before now, sightings have
mainly been along Cali’s west coast, but now Alien Kush
is starting to get spotted in the rest of North America,
too. In the words of Fox Mulder, “I want to believe!”




                            25
A




                                Ambrosia .
                               The combination of many cannabis strains in a single
                               joint is commonly referred to as a salad, and Ambrosia
                               truly is a stoner salad. It’s an equal balance between
                               God Bud, an indica and a Burmese sativa, with an aroma
                               leaning more towards God Bud – so much so that the
                               first toke got me thinking I’d picked up some God Bud
                               nugs. Ambrosia is a relaxing, clear headed, thought-pro-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               voking kind of toke, and video gamers report that Am-
                               brosia is fantastic for long online sessions. Fascinatingly,
                               I found my second vapor bag to be much more flavorful,
                               dense and astonishing than the first. The beyond solid
                               Ambrosia nugs have an incredible heft to them and
                               should make a plopping sound on the scale when
                               weighed. Ambrosia is wonderful weed with enough
                               couch-lock and alertness to keep potheads pleased
                               while playing.




                                                           26
                                                             A
 Amsterdam Cheese .
There are a growing number of cannabis Cheese vari-
eties, with all of them gaining much love for their pun-
gent, astringent aromas. According to folklore, the
original Cheese was discovered in a pack of Sensi
Seeds’ Skunk #1. Due to its unique flavor it was kept as a
clone only – slowly growing more and more legendary –
until seed breeders began to offer their own versions.
Amsterdam Cheese, with its softer tastes than the origi-
nal Cheese, more closely resembles UK Cheese than Ex-
odus Cheese. I acquired all three during the same strain
hunt to create my own Cheese-y comparisons. Amster-
dam Cheese is easier on your taste buds and the buzz
doesn’t last as long as the UK or Exodus varieties. It’s a
moderate indica stone, but nothing spectacular. There’s
some noticeable mild and mellow effects, but profes-
sionals will not be impressed. The aggressive taste is
spot on Cheese, but kind of generic – like a watered
down example of UK Cheese. Amsterdam Cheese is the
spray cheese of these strains – the generic or “no name”
brand of the Cheese varieties. Seek something more ex-
otic when it comes to Cheeses.




                           27
A




                                Apollo II .
                               You’ll be able to really distinguish Apollo 11 from the
                               smells wafting from her. The aroma is soft lemon, but
                               doesn’t explode into a beautiful stink when busted,
                               which is kind of disappointing. Apollo 11 is a zippy “get-
                               up-and-go” booster rocket of energy that is great for
                               your morning wake and bake. However, it’s not a smooth
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               buzz, but a distracting, hard to focus weed wallop. Too
                               much will for sure send you on a space-y trip beyond
                               the moon. Unlike other sativa strains with their wonder-
                               ful flavors, there’s little noticeable in the taste depart-
                               ment here, making it a challenge in a blind toker taste
                               test. However, it does have an awesome, long lasting
                               flight. Apollo 11 buds should be incredibly dense, glis-
                               tening with crystals and specked with little red hairs.
                               The strain appears and grows like an indica, but the
                               buzz is all sativa. An awesome choice for sativa lovers if
                               high is more important than taste.

                                                           28
                                                               A




 Apollo Snow .
A delightfully unique smelling strain, especially for an
indica, Apollo Snow has everything that professional pot-
heads seek in a stone. The smell is loud and proud with a
Cinderella 99-esque flavor that’s more than impressive.
These two traits and the appearance of the curiously
compact buds may confuse some tokers into believing
Apollo Snow is a soaring space-y sativa, but it isn’t.
Well... it kind of is. The buzz is very physically grounding
while your mind becomes intensely introspective. After
inhaling Apollo Snow you might even find yourself
watching paint dry because a doobie of this strain will
have you daydreaming all day long. It’s really easy to
lose track of time after a session and only when Apollo
Snow’s long lasting stone wears down will you discover
that your mind has been floating in space for hours.

                            29
A




                                Atomic Haze .
                               When pummeled by your grinder, Atomic Haze re-
                               leases a surprising and spicy berrylicious aroma that is
                               similar to Northern Lights #5. I was thrown off a little
                               when I busted the light, fluffy buds for my morning ses-
                               sion, thinking someone slipped me an indica instead of
                               a sativa, but it was fantastic for my wake and bake.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               Atomic Haze is loaded with a mental get-up-and-go, but
                               also has a strong couch-locking sensation that is diffi-
                               cult to break out of. The soaring, creative high is a fasci-
                               nating combination of the heady Haze and relaxed
                               Northern Lights. There’s nothing worse than getting all
                               paranoid and jittery after toking a joint and Haze strains
                               are known for their paranoia – especially when too
                               much is inhaled. Thankfully Atomic Haze has a nice
                               calming stone to go with its explosive mental zing that
                               means you won’t be pacing around or running up the
                               walls after puffing down on a joint.

                                                           30
B
B




                                BC Mango .
                               Even before you spark up your BC Mango nugs, you’ll
                               notice that the weedy, fruity aromas wafting from these
                               dense, indica-looking buds smell incredibly delicious.
                               BC Mango has an overwhelming fruity scent and reddish
                               trichome development. The marijuana mango scents are
                               rich, potent and intense and when breaking up the
                               dense buds tokers will become totally tantalized. On BC
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               Mango’s first rip, potheads fall in love. The lofty but
                               grounded high has plenty of creative, uplifting pop to it
                               and much can be accomplished when BC Mango is used
                               for a wake and bake session. When you’re finished you
                               should have an energetic “get-’er-done” attitude that
                               will last throughout your day. The uppity buzz also im-
                               proves moods, so I would suggest that people who have
                               depression issues or are just suffering a day of the blues
                               should consider some expertly grown BC Mango.




                                                          32
                                                                B




 Berry Craze .
Who isn’t crazy for a fruity, blueberry-flavored cannabis
strain? Before Kush took over, potheads were all about
fruit flavored strains. Now it can be difficult for the aver-
age enthusiast to find fruity tokes because of all the
Kushes, which is sad because Berry Craze has a com-
manding “bowlful-of-berries” flavor that taste tokers will
quickly twig on to. This strain looks like it was soaked in
cannabis crystals and the peaceful, smooth elevation is
perfect for soaking up sunshine. Berry Craze puts a
spring in your step, but not a jog. Plan a wonderful
sunny-day doobie with a bowl full of fruit to experience
what I’m talking about. Berry Craze complements a
fruity snack perfectly. Unfortunately, it’s a private head
stash making it almost impossible to find unless you
have the right hook up.




                             33
B




                                Big Buddha Cheese .
                               This strain just reeks of Cheese-y cannabis. Big Buddha’s
                               Cheese is unreal and sets a great standard to compare
                               other Cheese strains to. Both this strain and Green House
                               Seeds’ Exodus Cheese have an incredible aggressive fla-
                               vor and a stone that puts most Kush weed to shame. You
                               won’t have many problems distinguishing upper crust
                               Cheese strains as their stink will give you away in public
                               at 100 paces unless you’re in the supermarket’s dairy
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               aisle. Big Buddha’s Cheese will glue your ass down and
                               potentially have you sliding out of the chair. Toke in a re-
                               cliner for best effect! Noobs and professionals alike may
                               green out on its out-of-this-world buzz. The really relax-
                               ing stone is great for slow, lazy afternoons. Big Buddha
                               Cheese is part of a growing number of Cheese strains
                               that tokers really twig to.




                                                           34
 Black Domina .                                               B
This Afhani-hashish-meets-black-licorice flavor is an in-
credibly unique aroma that needs to be experienced to
be fully understood. Black Domina exudes an exquisite
and exotic vibe that puts it a cut above almost every-
thing else. Once you’ve experienced this, you’re going
to want to find it again and again – or even better, grow
it yourself. The true Domina is a stoner standout in the
categories of aroma, flavor and stone, with an incredibly
yummy aniseed flavor that your taste buds will remem-
ber long after it’s gone. This strain tastes and smells so
good, I could toke it all day. However, if you smoke for
long, you will become unproductive quickly. It’s exceed-
ingly difficult to write about Black Domina and vape it at
same time, but I tried. This strain sits your ass down and
won’t let it go for several hours. Your ability to communi-
cate may dampen and friends could overstay their
weedy welcome simply because they can’t move. “I bet-
ter go now or I won’t be able to go home for hours,” one
colleague said, as he politely excused himself after a
session. A sedate stone puts plenty of people to sleep,
either for an afternoon weed nap or straight through
until morning. It’s a stellar pain reliever, especially for
chronic joint pain. Black Domina
is a cannabis classic, a great
alternative to the Kush
ganja glut, and
relatively
unknown.




                            35
B




                                Blackberry .
                               Interestingly, there’s a noticeable, harsh Blackberry tang
                               on the exhale of this strain, but not on the inhale. When
                               busted, Blackberry nugs will release a considerably
                               dark, fruity smell; it’s a very tasty toke that creates slow
                               sluggish vibes. During the day it’s probably best to
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               counteract the powerful indica properties with some caf-
                               feine or a sativa or you’ll find yourself napping. When
                               combined with one of these more “uppy” options, Black-
                               berry becomes the perfect pot for wake and bakes be-
                               cause you’ll get a speedy but relaxing effect. Beware:
                               without a stimulant, the downward relaxing buzz will
                               lock you up and this could potentially get your day
                               going very slowly. Blackberry is clearly an evening toke
                               for after everything is done or perhaps a daytime smoke
                               for people with chronic pain problems. A great strain to
                               vaporize before bed.

                                                           36
                                                               B




 Blue Hawaiian .
Gorgeous, sparkly and covered in trichomes, Blue
Hawaiian has a slightly tropical taste that meshes per-
fectly with its berry fruitiness. The buds are so pretty
you might want to pause to admire before busting them
– but don’t pause for too long! It has an exotic flavor that
goes down smooth and exhales easy; I was able to take
deep, heavy rips of Blue Hawaiian with no problems at
all. Anticipate a sedate and mentally stalling stone. Blue
Hawaiian really fogged up my brain good, making it a
challenge to do these weedy write ups. Potheads will
love Blue Hawaiian’s great stress relieving effects: your
woes disappear after a session. For optimum results put
your favorite chill music on beforehand. There’s nothing
worse than getting comfortably high and forgetting to
put on your perfect pothead music. Tunes just sound
better after blazing Blue Hawaiian because it enhances
your senses.




                             37
B




                                Blue Satellite .
                               This soaring, blue-berry scented Spice of Life strain re-
                               leases a rich, expressive berry aroma when ground up.
                               The confusing smell means that Blue Satellite can easily
                               be mistaken for straight up Blueberry. However, the Blue
                               Satellite taste and effect is much different from DJ Short’s
                               most famous strain. Blue Satellite produces a tasty, fla-
                               vorful toke with an austere after bite, which is rather sur-
                               prising for a fruity strain. Nugs will be heavily dusted
                               with trichomes, ensuring that a little amount goes a long
                               way: half a Volcano vaporizer canister created several
                               London fog bags. It’s a much smoother ride than straight
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               up Blueberry, and smooth slow rides are best when tak-
                               ing it easy. You can kick back with Blue Satellite because
                               it creates one of those introspective zone outs; the kind
                               of head-space where you find yourself in a peaceful zen
                               state, staring blankly at walls, thinking or trying to think
                               about absolutely nothing. Blue Satellite will send you on
                               a wonderful trip around the planet and even the boldest
                               sativa lover will spend a considerable time in orbit. The
                               flight starts out fast until reaching your personal orbiting
                               space, and then you’ll be coasting at your perfect high
                               for a long time.

                                                           38
                                                              B




 Blue Widow .
This wonderful spicy Blueberry and White Widow mix
has excellent aromas, flavors and most importantly an
awesome mental pep. Blue Widow buds are just popping
with unique, fruity White strain smells which become
even louder after busting. Potheads who experience its
rich, opulent flavors will remember this one even after a
serious heady session. Blue Widow has motivating, uplift-
ing and mildly body relaxing properties. It’s excellent
wake and bake weed and great to toke throughout the
day, but I’d avoid it at night because you won’t be sleepy
at all. The strain produces an awesome thick and dense
smoke that’s not aggressive. Blue Widow is soft, mellow,
tasty and easy to inhale with a flavor that’s going to last
until the end of your session.

                            39
B




                                Blueberry .
                               The marvelous marijuana fruitiness created by DJ
                               Short’s Blueberry set a standard by which all berry
                               strains are now judged. Blueberry is the main ganja ge-
                               netic building block of dozens of berry-flavored
                               cannabis types; somewhere in almost every berry strain
                               lurks a Blueberry. The original has a delicious, frothy,
                               berry aroma, flavor and high. Just a little nug produces
                               an incredibly yummy, berry-licious tasting vapor bag,
                               and smokers should anticipate sticky, gluey ganja joints.
                               Blueberry has both a soaring lofty feeling and a body
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               relaxing mellowness. A nice, slow, upward ride. The best
                               thing is that this vibe has plenty of legs! However, there’s
                               something about Blueberry that makes it difficult to
                               judge how far gone you are, until you’re straight up jit-
                               tery – or at least that’s the case for me. It’s not a comfort-
                               able feeling, and it eventually fades away. If you go over
                               the top, just ride it out with deep breaths, not 911 calls. It
                               might be Blueberry’s outrageous taste that keeps me
                               toking more than I should. Sadly, with so many berry hy-
                               brids available these days, it’s a little more challenging
                               to find the real Blueberry.

                                                            40
                                                             B




 Blueberry Hashplant .
Every time I toke Blueberry Hashplant my creative en-
ergy is zapped because it’s mostly an indica with a dull,
downward stone, leaving me nothing more than a slug-
gish thinker. This berry-delicious indica has wonderful
body relaxing qualities and is perfect for unwinding a
stressed out mind. Don’t anticipate accomplishing much
after a session. The stone keeps going-and-going-and-
going, probably until you’re sleeping comfortably. Yes, it
does taste like blueberry tinged hash! The gutsy hashish
taste of Hash Plant meshes perfectly with Blueberry’s
fruity zeal. The parents produce buds that have great
bag appeal, but the nugs didn’t have much smell to
them. I’m surprised this one isn’t around more–or more
available from a reputable seed breeder for mass con-
sumption. It’s kind of surprising given the genetics are
both very solid and readily available. Blueberry Hash-
plant is worthy of this kind of attention.




                           41
B




                                Blueberry Haze .
                               This strain is a potent, spicy, fruity offspring of Blueberry
                               and Haze that has a slight hint of berry aromas when
                               first whiffed, though it’s not very noticeable compared to
                               other fruity strains. Once inhaled you’ll taste the berries
                               instantly, but be more prepared for an astringent after-
                               taste: a spicy shock! The stone leans more towards in-
                               dica than sativa, providing a relaxing body buzz with a
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               space-y, euphoric mental zing. However, tasty Blueberry
                               Haze is a creeper high, making it easy to overindulge.
                               The underlining Haze can create a paranoid mind state
                               if too much is inhaled; you may find yourself dizzy,
                               stressed or overly worried. The idea is to get an enjoy-
                               able zip on, not a panicky freak out. Approach Blueberry
                               Haze with cannabis caution because it’ll easily send you
                               over the moon before you know it. Anticipate a long-last-
                               ing, soaring skyscraper effect and you’ll be fine. This
                               strain is not newcomer friendly; however, it’s perfect for
                               a personal, professional pothead’s head stash.

                                                            42
 Blueberry Kush .                                           B
There was an overwhelming stench of fresh blueberries
coming off these buds and the accompanying Kush odor
danked up my place something fierce. Blueberry Kush is
damn yummy with smooth Blueberry flavors giving way
to heavy Kush overtones that hang on your palette. The
buds have plenty of ganja girth to them, but they’re easy
to break up. This marijuana strain produces an excellent
and hardy vapor bag and a resinous joint. Blueberry
Kush is a lung tickler with wonderful in-the-zone vibes
that are perfect for mental activities; whether you’re
playing chess or video games or making art, this strain
will bring your game to the next level. After a session
you’ll become very focused and task oriented.
My video gaming was much improved
after Blueberry Kush and it was
great for book editing.




                           43
B                               Blueberry OG Kush .
                               Two classic types of cannabis combine in this strain to
                               create one stellar stone. Blueberry OG Kush is a tasty in-
                               dica with subtle hints of berries hiding behind a wall of
                               pure Kush zest. The stronger OG Kush zing simply out-
                               shines Blueberry in this combination, creating an awe-
                               some pain reliever with a sedate, mellow, focused but
                               active effect. Chronics who play video games will love
                               the bullet time effect that Blueberry OG Kush creates.
                               One joint or a vapor session makes it easy to get in the
                               zone. I love playing video games that allow for many
                               toke breaks with cut scenes, and Blueberry OG Kush
                               made gaming for hours so enjoyable – possibly too en-
                               joyable. The buds produced a harsh heavy vapor that
                               caused some coughing, but many Kushes do that to me.
                               Blueberry OG Kush is a stupendous strain, but not as
                               readily available as it ought to be.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                                                          44
                                                               B




 Bubba Kush.
Renowned for its incredibly rich, exotic flavors, Bubba
Kush is one of the premier Kush strains. This is a standout
amongst the crowded Kush cannabis field with its over-
the-top smell, though its buzz and taste are very worthy
too. Bubba Kush, after Purple Kush and Master Kush, is on
the top of just about every pothead’s toker taste test list,
especially if they’re a Kush fanatic–and who doesn’t
adore Kush? Bubba Kush has been around for some time,
with plenty of people offering their own take on this ex-
cellent toke. Anticipate dense fluffy nugs, potentially with
flecks of purple because Bubba Kush bag appeal is top
notch. When busted, buds will dank up your room with
serious Kush odors so beware you don’t get busted by
the man. The difficult to disguise smell will notify neigh-
bors both nosy and marijuana loving. Bubba Kush is a
gorgeous indica strain with plenty of slow-you-down,
body numbing, pain relieving properties. The stone is in-
tensely relaxing, long-lasting and sleep inducing. Basi-
cally, it’s everything you want in a Kush.



                            45
B




                                bubble assault .
                               This beautiful smelling blend of AK47 and Blueberry is a
                               delightful combination of these two cannabis classics.
                               The AK47 really shines through with its strong scent
                               when the buds are first busted, but it’s the dash of Blue-
                               berry that makes Bubble Assault unique. Buds produce
                               a rich, resinous vapor that produces a hardy pothead
                               lung-tickling cough. Billed as an even split between in-
                               dica and sativa, Bubble Assault slowed me down, but not
                               completely. Great for getting household tasks com-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               pleted, video gaming or spending time in your grow
                               room. Bubble Assault very much resembles classic mid
                               90s cannabis in look and feel. Until now, Calgary, AB
                               wasn’t known for marijuana, but with this creation, Crazy
                               Diamond Seeds has made at least one critic take notice.




                                                          46
                                                            B




 bubblegum .
The wonderful sweetness really shines on once Bubble
Gum is busted. A sticky, syrupy smell just wafts off the
rolling tray. There are many examples of this type of
sickly sweet aromatic cannabis that I like to refer to as
‘Memories of Amsterdam’. The dark red and green col-
ors really make Bubble Gum pop, so much so that you
might consider for a moment not busting it up, but once
you do, it has an incredible introspective high and body
relaxing qualities making it wonderful weed to come
home to at the end of the day. After rolling a doobie of
Bubble Gum, kick back in your favorite easy chair and
let the stress roll off you. When you close your eyes and
set the mood you’ll enjoy the effects even more.




                           47
C
                                                               C




 Cannalope Haze .
I’m all about a serving of fruit first thing in the morning!
While Cannalope Haze doesn’t technically qualify, it’s
still utterly fantastic for morning sessions. This straight
up sativa from DNA Genetics has a nice accessible
melon flavor, and the soft, supple smell is delicious.
Cannalope Haze is really easy to inhale. One reason that
it’s perfect for wake and bakes is that it has no harsh
cough, making it easier on your lungs in the morning.
You’re going to be flying on an easy take off, as this
sativa gives a soaring, motivational, “get it done” flight.
Be prepared to knock tasks off your to do list! The all-
natural, get-up-and-go high is preferred by many pot-
heads over caffeine beverages; why choose Red Bull
when you can inhale Cannalope Haze and enjoy its
weedy wings? A morning serving will help many enthu-
siasts through their whole day, or at least until 4:20pm.
Unfortunately, Cannalope Haze is fairly difficult to find
unless you know a grower or have access to a well
stocked, sativa loving dispensary. With people seeking
motivational marijuana, Cannalope Haze may become
more available, at least on dispensary menus.

                             49
C




                                Cataract Kush .
                               When it comes to really buzzed, glued to the couch or
                               heavily pain relieved, Cataract Kush goes above and be-
                               yond the call of doobie. The Kush taste is unbelievably
                               smooth, yummy and delicious, impressing even the
                               hardest of Kush-hating snobs. People with chronic pain
                               really enjoy Cataract Kush’s stellar flavor, which doesn’t
                               wear thin even when you constantly toke it. Even sea-
                               soned stoners have problems keeping their eyelids from
                               becoming heavy or getting flushed red and squinty.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               Some stoners refer to this as Visine weed. Cataract Kush
                               is a powerful indica cross of LA Confidential and OG
                               Kush that creates excellent long-lasting
                               body relief. Unless you want a weed
                               nap, I’d suggest rolling half your
                               regular size joints. Hardy bong
                               hitters should be prepared for a
                               huge, lung expanding experi-
                               ence. This is truly “if you
                               don’t cough you don’t get
                               off” weed.

                                                          50
                                                              C




 Champagne .
Why doesn’t this bud go down smooth like the alcoholic
beverage it’s named after? It doesn’t even have a tingly,
bubbly taste. I don’t get it. Shockingly, the toke has a
fairly rough pine forest taste, which takes some getting
used to. I personally like it, as it reminds me of Northern
Lights with its harsh, juniper tones. The earthy pine
smells explode when the nug is busted, and the high
creates a moderately sedate and relaxing vibe. Cham-
pagne is excellent wake and bake weed, because it’s
rather weak. You can smoke a joint or rip a bong load
before heading out the door to start your day fairly
gunned, but not useless. The light chill effect should
keep you going until lunch hour. Champagne’s rough
and hardy but unimpressive looking buds have a classic
`70s look to them. This isn’t the prettiest pot, especially
considering its name.




                            51
C




                                Cheese .
                               Cheese strains are an acquired taste; some tokers have
                               turned their nose up at this stinky, burnt-cheese-
                               smelling offering, especially when the buds smell like
                               goat or foot cheese. However, Cheese is becoming a
                               very popular strain with a cool origin story. It’s not for
                               the faint at heart, or people with lactose intolerance. Ac-
                               cording to legend, Cheese was discovered in a pack of
                               Sensi Seeds Skunk #1. Recognizing its uniqueness, the
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               grower kept some clones; skip ahead a few years and
                               now almost every seed bank has their own version. The
                               bud smell is extremely noticeable before busting, be-
                               coming even stronger after they’ve been broken up.
                               Most Cheese strains lean more towards indica than
                               sativa, but all have the recognizable Cheese odor. This
                               sample had a nice downward thump with an alert mental
                               zing. The soaring uplift is smooth not jittery. Unlike some
                               Cheese samples that have an awful goat cheese smell,
                               this one was pleasant and aromatic. It was expressive
                               without the yucky stench that turns some stoners off.

                                                           52
                                                                C




 Cheese Cake .
A growing variety of Cheese strains are becoming more
readily available for discerning potheads. Like the ac-
tual dairy product, it comes in all forms; from harsh, hard
flavors to soft delicate ones. Unlike some of the other
kinds of Cheese cannabis out there, Cheese Cake’s taste
is soft, enjoyable and lights up your palate. Anticipate a
strong, sensational aftertaste that is going to linger on
your tongue long after your joint has been roached.
Cheese Cake is a smooth, soaring sativa with awesome
clarity; your flight will be very focused. Nugs are incred-
ibly dense and upon first inspection it will appear like
an indica. Actually, the only way to tell it’s a sativa is to
inhale. Cheese Cake is heavy and delicious like the
dessert, but not quite as fattening, so you can go back
for seconds and thirds without feeling guilty.




                             53
 ChemDawg .                                                    C
The energetic, insightful and mood elevating effects of
ChemDawg are sometimes overlooked because every-
one who experiences its unique, metallic tinge can do
nothing but talk about its taste. However, its soar is
equally as strong. Potheads talk and talk about Chem-
Dawg’s jet fuel-like flavor after they’ve inhaled it. The
strain is very similar to New York City Diesel or Sour
Diesel making it very easy to get these three strains
confused, but this is sour, yucky-face marijuana at its
best. The unreal tart taste is not for every toker, but
those who do enjoy metallic sourness will really want to
discover ChemDawg. Not until they’re ground up do the
big fluffy buds release their unnatural pollution smell;
it’s an overpowering chemically stench that easily fills a
room. ChemDawg has a restful, alert buzz that isn’t typi-
cal of a sativa. There’s no jittery paranoia if you toke too
much, and instead you seem to get into a great groove.




                             55
C




                                Cherry       x   AK-47 .
                               Kind of like adding cherry syrup to Coke, the Serious
                               Seeds cannabis classic AK-47 receives a little pop in the
                               flavor department. Cherry is a very welcome fruity sen-
                               sation and is perfect for plumping up the rather bland
                               tasting AK-47. The clean, fruity aroma jumps when
                               busted and a small amount will create a serious session.
                               Anticipate a chewy, candied cherry taste with a slam-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               ming astringent after bite. The high is social and men-
                               tally alert, with a humming body buzz. The strain is
                               labeled sativa dominant, but many enthusiasts will be
                               fooled into believing its smooth, relaxing, unwinding
                               high is an indica. The AK-47 bud structure remains:
                               heavy, yet slightly fluffy. Cherry x AK-47 isn’t an official
                               release, but it should be. Sadly, as this is mainly a private
                               stash, picking some up is difficult, but finding AK-47 is
                               not. In the mean time, there’s no need to create your own
                               cannabis genetics; simply add a tasty Cherry sample to
                               an AK-47 joint to experience a similar effect.

                                                            56
                                                               C




 Chocolate Thai .
Czart! The rich dark chocolate and coffee aroma wafting
from Chocolate Thai will bring any pothead to their
knees. The airy, foxtailed nugs are absolutely unreal!
When it comes to smells this one is by far one of my fa-
vorites; it smells so good it may trick you into toking it
all at once. However, it’s best not to be like a kid devour-
ing their first stash of chocolate or there could be some
serious consequences, such as an inability to focus or sit
still – much like a kid on a sugar high! Chocolate Thai is
über-potent, which can easily create sativa panic at-
tacks, freak outs and other pot paranoia. If this happens,
just remember: you are not going to die! Relaxing might
be a problem, but you will not shuffle off this mortal coil.
Take deep breaths. The zip of this strain is akin to Mario
bouncing around the clouds, but finding some Choco-
late Thai is as difficult as beating Bowser – at least for
me. Given its lengthy flowering time, grow challenges
and wispy exceedingly light buds, not many growers
choose Chocolate Thai, making this fantastic cannabis
exceedingly rare.

                            57
C




                                Chocolope .
                               Rocking out at 95 percent sativa, DNA Genetics’ Choco-
                               lope is a sativa lover’s dream – and, in fact, a cannabis
                               lover’s dream in general. It’s a gorgeous old school
                               strain with a soaring flight time and tasty cocoa
                               cannabis tang. Chocolope grabs potheads harder than a
                               kid pulling their mom towards a candy store. Stoners
                               who were on the scene in the ‘70s and ‘80s may experi-
                               ence some kind of Thai fantasy flashback. I wasn’t inhal-
                               ing then, so I don’t know, but I do have friends from
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               those days who dig their sativas. Chocolope harks back
                               to the day when Thai cannabis ruled the roost with its
                               uplifting, motivating high and its taste of bitter ground
                               coffee and chocolate-y awesomeness. Toke with caution,
                               as its brightly green and red colored small nugs pro-
                               duce a powerful, potent and heady high that can lead to
                               pothead paranoia. This is jittery, fast paced marijuana.
                               Think of it as an espresso shot of pot.




                                                          58
 Chronic .
With a name like Chronic, this strain has to be utterly        C
amazing. Serious Seeds’ juniper-scented offering has
been around for some time, and has become a true
cannabis classic by anyone’s standards. The Northern
Lights-like fragrance is subtle, but still fairly strong for
an indica that was first released in the mid-90s and then
updated in the 2000s. It’s been a long time since I’ve
heard stoners refer to cannabis as “chronic”; back in the
day potheads used to say they have “chronic” like en-
thusiasts say they have “kush” now. It wasn’t a reference
to this specific strain, but just great weed. Chronic has a
distinct but subtle, delicious flavor, and the smoke is so
heavy you can chew on it. The buzz is an excellent bal-
ance between relaxation of the body and mental alert-
ness: a very chilled experience and great for productive
afternoon sessions. Chronic will probably couch-lock
new tokers, but seasoned and professional potheads
will enjoy going about their day after a session. Chronic
is a charming cannabis strain and is readily available
because of its appeal to commercial growers.




                            59
C




                                Chronic Ryder .
                               This autoflowering cross of Chronic and Lowryder of-
                               fered by The Joint Doctor demonstrates their dedication
                               to producing excellent boutique strains. Despite it being
                               an autoflowering strain, Chronic Ryder’s potency, aroma
                               and flavor stays fairly true to the much larger Serious
                               Seeds classic. The beautiful, dense nugs have amazing
                               bag appeal and will make a “thunk” sound when
                               dropped on your rolling tray. The buds have a mild ju-
                               niper smell, but really stink like Chronic after you grind
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               them up. You can’t chew Chronic Ryder’s smoke like you
                               can with Chronic, as the Lowryder smooths out Chronic’s
                               harsher elements for a much easier toke. It’s still a really
                               rich smoke, but just isn’t quite as lung expanding. The
                               stone is spot on body relaxing, but not overly sedate,
                               making it perfect pot for my pained mornings. Unfortu-
                               nately, Chronic Ryder is a small producer, meaning that
                               it is usually only available for people who grow it and
                               their lucky friends.




                                                           60
C




                                Cinderella 99 .
                               Cinderella 99 has a fantastic bitter smell. When the buds
                               are broken up they release an even more amazing sour-
                               ish, fruity aroma which is more like fake or factory cre-
                               ated grapefruit than real acidic grapefruit, akin to the
                               taste of Sour Patch Kids. Weird, I know! The euphoric,
                               uplifting weed whir is wonderful for wake and bake ses-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               sions and is great at relieving stress. Cinderella 99 helps
                               me get through a mountain of chores. If Monday had an
                               official marijuana strain, Cinderella 99 would be a good
                               choice because it can create ganja giggle fits but not put
                               you totally out of commission. Too much will give you
                               coffee-like jitters, and there is also a possibility of some
                               paranoia. The buds are especially dense, considering
                               it’s more sativa than indica. The best method to deter-
                               mine whether your stash of Cinderella 99 leans more to-
                               wards sativa or indica is to smoke it.



                                                           62
                                                            C




 Cindy 99 .
Cindy 99 has the familiar grapefruit smell of Cinderella
99, but the effect is dramatically different. That’s be-
cause Cindy 99 is an indica, whereas Cinderella 99 can
lean either way. The stone, scent and flavor are much
more muted than Cinderella 99. Cindy 99 puts your
mind in a sleeper hold and shouldn’t be toked before
going out, unless you’re planning on doing a very slow
moving activity. Before going out to a party, I sparked a
phatty of Cindy 99 and had to hit my bed instead of the
scene. It’s easy to overindulge on this powerful indica,
with consequences such as missed social engagements
because of long peaceful sleeps. Instead of an acidic af-
tertaste, the flavor is very smooth and sweet. Goes down
very easy.




                           63
C




                                Cripple Creek .
                               Cripple Creek is a uniquely named (think The Band
                               song, or the Neil Young classic) commercial Kush cross.
                               It has wonderfully relaxing properties, just like a slow
                               winding creek. The incredibly dense and compact buds
                               create a very long lasting buzz and it takes just a few
                               nugs to really have an enjoyable experience. This strain
                               gives great Kush value for your dollars! When busted,
                               the buds release a strong harsh Kush smell that could be
                               either Pine Tar Kush or Cocoa Kush, depending on who
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               you sourced it from. Prepare your taste buds for a harsh
                               beating as this is an aggressive tasting toke. Cripple
                               Creek is a Kush lover’s delight, mostly because it is af-
                               fordable and has a heavy downward stone. This weed
                               seriously wallops you! It’s not suitable for an afternoon
                               session and don’t even attempt a morning session.
                               Though I did try hard not to take a nap after an after-
                               noon vapor session, Cripple Creek won. There’s nothing
                               wrong with getting canna-crippled to the point of need-
                               ing a weed nap, and this strain is perfect for that.



                                                          64
                                                               C




 Critical + .
Be prepared to lose track of time after toking this weed.
The heavy indica of Dinafem Seeds’ Critical +, a Big
Bud/Skunk cross, creates strong relaxing vibes. You just
sink into your chair, not quite locked into it, but at one
with your furniture. Hours may go by before you realize
you’ve been mellowed all afternoon. The headspace is
very meditative for both mind and body. Actually, Criti-
cal + is a difficult strain to perform creative tasks on and
errands too. The smoke is extremely strong and ganja
gutsy, producing a heavy vapor bag. Many people will
cough, especially when Critical + is ripped in a bong or
possibly even a joint. The smell is minimal and the flavor
leans heavily towards a harsh Skunk. I’m a fan of Critical
+ and prefer this sort of Skunk flavor over the sweetly
sickly Skunk taste that so many other Skunk strains have
going for them. Unless you’re intending on napping, in-
haling Critical + during the day is not advisable.




                            65
C




                                Critical Haze .
                               The gorgeous aromas of perfume that come from Criti-
                               cal Haze are pretty, but are not so girlish that they’re a
                               toker turn off. Some of the Critical + strains have this
                               Amsterdam scent to them that is a little too much for me,
                               but I’ll continue to toke them to see if I can acquire a
                               taste for them. Surprisingly for a sativa rooted in Haze,
                               the buds of Critical Haze have a solid girth to them. The
                               tender red trichome hairs are classic sativa and as such,
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               Critical Haze has a very trippy high that turned me into
                               a stoner space cadet. Critical Haze’s light, zippy and not
                               too spicy taste is fantastic and will light up your stoner
                               senses. Bong-ripping professionals are for sure going to
                               notice a spicy Haze flavor. The stone goes straight to
                               your eyeballs so anticipate heavy lids and the sort of red
                               eyes you can’t explain away by saying that you have a
                               cold.




                                                          66
                                                             C




 Critical Yumbolt .
An incredibly yummy combination of Yumbolt and Criti-
cal +, this cannabis strain is a powerful and potent pain
reliever as well as a sedate couch-locker. At first glance
its bland looks are kind of deceiving, but Critical Yum-
bolt is weed worth checking out. The nugs are hardy,
rough hewn and mildly ugly, but pack a potent indica
punch. What its buds lack in beauty, Critical Yumbolt
makes up for in a killer body buzz. I highly recommend
this one for pain relief because it cut mine in half on a
day when I was practically in tears from chronic pain
from my head right to the tip of my toes. About half a
Volcano vaporizer canister produced several rich, heavy
vapor bags of pain relief and the smoke was great for
curling up into bed and sleeping. That’s weird for weed
that leans more sativa than indica, but that’s what hap-
pened to me.




                           67
C




                                Crush .
                               Crush buds are packed with plenty of delicate red tri-
                               chomes so be sure not to crush your stash when hiding
                               it. These little red hairs are extremely fragile and will
                               cling to plastic bags via static electricity like kids cling
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               to their parents on the first day of school. Instead of in-
                               haling its greatness, you’re then stuck with crushed tri-
                               chomes, making the baggy all sticky. For a sativa, the
                               strain has very little noticeable flavor and smell. Major
                               pothead points are deducted for no smell sativas, mak-
                               ing this strain mid range at best. However, Crush did
                               produce an excellent and rich vapor bag of mostly up-
                               lifting giddiness, but my flight time wasn’t a long haul.
                               Instead, Crush created a quick uplifting jolt, but with a
                               quick end time, leaving me with not much to write
                               about.

                                                            68
                                                              C




 Crystal Moon .
One would expect Crystal Moon to be packed with glit-
tery trichomes, but it’s not, leaving me baffled over the
reference. Nevertheless, the plentiful red trichomes
mashed into the green buds create pretty indica nugs
with fast acting but short-term pain relieving qualities.
Crystal Moon worked wonders on my scoliosis pain. The
strain creates a sedate lazy high, but not a nappy stone. I
felt very grounded, with an unexpected mental clarity. I
was expecting a space-y orbiting effect, but there wasn’t
one. The buds gave off a bland Northern Lights-like
smell. The boring aroma lacked a lively tone and the fla-
vor was barely noticeable. This private stash got me
gunned, but lacked anything else worthy of doing an-
other session with it.




                            69
D
                                                               D




 Deadhead Kush .
Just a small nug of Deadhead Kush will have stoners
blocks away showing up at your door; it is by far one of
the stinkiest Kushes around. Imagine the Grateful Dead
playing in your backyard. It’s not safe to travel with
Deadhead Kush, especially on public transit. People will
start sniffing themselves and the air to find who danks. It
happened to me and it could easily happen to you. The
rock hard buds produce an expensive, heavy Kush-fla-
vored smoke that will cause plenty of cannabis enthusi-
asts to cough up a lung or two. This is strictly a nighttime
toke because its powerful sedative properties will put
even the hardest of professional potheads down for a
weed nap. One regular-sized doobie dropped my pain
levels in half. I can understand why this is a popular
medical strain at dispensaries. Deadhead Kush’s effects
are long lasting and only a little is required to get even
the most tolerant tokers beyond blazed.




                            71
                                                            D



 Deep Purple .
As you might expect, there are some seriously heavy
grape and purple flavors to Deep Purple. This becomes
very noticeable should you take a moment to inhale its
gorgeous scent before ripping, vaping or rolling a joint.
The grape-y scents are so very impressive that they re-
ally deserve your extra attention. Deep Purple is an in-
dica dominant strain which is an excellent balance of
Purple Urkle and Querkle (which sounds like a kids’ TV
show to me). About halfway through my session I found
myself slipping and sliding out of my chair because
Deep Purple has amazing body relaxing
effects; it’s rare that an indica can
put me so solidly down for
the count, but this one
did. Tired and weary
weed warriors will re-
ally twig to Deep Pur-
ple because it knocks
you over completely.
This strain made me
want to sleep for
hours, and after a few
vape bags, I did just that.

                           73
E
                                                               E




 Exodus Cheese .
Exodus Cheese has a reputation for a pungent, rancid,
mountain goat cheese dank and a lazy stone that hits
you right behind your eyeballs. The funky stench is ex-
tremely astringent and so God awful overpowering that
many potheads will for sure make some kind of dis-
gusted face. Exodus Cheese buds are exceedingly
chunky, but when cured correctly will break up beauti-
fully. This indica dominant strain stands out for its couch-
locking, slack jawed, full body melt. My first time
experiencing a stellar sample in a bong had me sliding
out of my chair ten minutes later. That hasn’t happened
to me in a long time, and people around me were
amazed. It’s like the first time you inhaled! For many
people Exodus Cheese induces a serious munchies at-
tack too. Some stoners may find themselves sleepily eat-
ing cereal or other easy-to-access foods as Exodus
Cheese makes you very lazy. Have your necessary sup-
plies nearby because it’s long-lasting, with a trip being
around a four hour haul. Exodus Cheese is a stellar ex-
ample of not just Cheese varieties, but ganja in general.

                            75
F
                                                                F



 Fruit Defendu .
A somewhat lively, fruity smelling strain, Fruit Defendu
is a rugged tasting toke capable of toppling over many
professional potheads. The hefty, solid, almost commer-
cial looking nugs are kind of off putting, but don’t let that
stop you from trying this strain. Fruit Defendu is an in-
credibly potent indica that dropped my pain levels nu-
merous notches. Medical marijuana people will love that
just a little goes a long way in producing great effects.
Professional potheads will truly enjoy its stoned out vibe
and the fact that it is wonderful weed for kicking back in
a recliner. Fruit Defendu has a long lasting buzz with lots
of potential for napping after a session. Make yourself
comfortable in advance with the necessary technology
and toke-ology nearby because you’re not going any-
where after inhaling.




                             77
G
                                                             G




 Grand Daddy Purple .
It’s unfortunate that my Grand Daddy Purple sample
didn’t have the purple hues it’s supposed to have. I
sought out a better sample, but alas, I couldn’t find one.
Deep shades of purple are one way to tell if you have
the real doobie deal. However, GDP doesn’t always turn
purple, making it a challenge sometimes to determine
its true identity. Grand Daddy Purple has a great Purple
Urkle grape flavor and smell to it. The big, dense buds
create a fantastic, heady, relaxing rush with a good
amount of laziness thrown in. The lazy vibe is really fun
for playing around on Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr or
wherever you may e-roam. Grand Daddy Purple is more
mass-produced (and therefore readily available) on the
west coast than on the east coast where it remains more
of a boutique-style bud.




                            79
G

                                Grape God .
                               Grape God is a stellar hybrid of two beautiful strains:
                               God Bud with its excellent exotic earthy aromas and
                               powerful stone and Grapefruit, famous for its tart taste
                               and uplifting zip. It’s best to prepare your toker taste
                               buds for a smooth but aggressive acidic bite. The hefty
                               buds have an incredible overwhelming rich grape
                               scent. Overpowering fruity sensations lean more to-
                               wards tangy grape rather than a sweet grape. Grape
                               God’s concentrated smoke and vapor made me cough
                               like a nug noob with every inhale. It’s a very challenging
                               strain on my lungs and bong rips bring tears to my eyes.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               Grape God is a popular indica at many medical dispen-
                               saries. This strain possesses a fantastic body relaxing ef-
                               fect without any loss of mental clarity. Some people may
                               find that Grape God has a nice stress relieving effect
                               too. Like God Bud, the buzz begins to build into a
                               cannabis crescendo and can continue to get stronger
                               and louder the more you toke.




                                                           80
                                                             G


 Grape God Kush .
These lush, rich purple buds are exceedingly distinct,
allowing Grape God Kush to stand out in the crowded
purple cannabis field. This strain possesses a flavor that
is aggressively grape-like, with heavy earthy Kush and
purple candy qualities creating a remarkable tasting
toke. Experienced heads will recognize three unique
features that build upon each other; Grapefruit’s grape,
God Bud’s smooth resinous taste and Purple Kush’s pur-
ple candy. Grape God Kush has a wonderful couch-lock-
ing, pain relieving, sedate mood enhancing vibe. It’s the
kind of strain that you can’t wait to come home to. Not
much is going to get done after hitting a bong or joint’s
worth of this powerful indica. Novices will be put down
for the cannabis count and marijuana reviewers will
have problems writing words. Grape God Kush zapped
my creative energy and made me want to nap some-
thing fierce when I sampled some to write this entry.




                            81
 Grapefruit .
This is an easy one to figure because of its fabulous, ap-
petizing, fruity aroma that is pure pink grapefruit. The
overwhelming Grapefruit zing is just as amazing. When
inhaled, it’s slightly acidic, just like the fruit it’s named
after. Each mouthful feels like you’re drinking a glass of
grapefruit juice. Just a little nug produced wonderful
amounts of dense, flavorful vapor. Best of all, Grapefruit      G
didn’t lose its concentrated taste after multiple vapor
bags. The edgy taste complements its soaring zip, which
gave me a serious case of morning munchies. Buds are
loud, compact and sparkle under natural lighting. When
cured correctly, Grapefruit nugs break up beautifully.
Everything about this strain makes it perfect for break-
fast, from its fruitiness and aroma to its smooth stone.
You’re going to know if you have the real deal because
Grapefruit cannot be faked. There are several versions
of Grapefruit, but the acidic grapefruit smell is a dead
giveaway.




                             83
G




                                Grapefruit Diesel .
                               A very tart strain that is a serious lung tickler, Grapefruit
                               Diesel’s delicious sour taste had me hacking like a noob.
                               The coughing comes from exhaling because your taste
                               buds are still trying to recover from the inhale tartness.
                               Best of all is the fact that this strain doesn’t lose its flavor
                               after successive vapor rounds. Grapefruit Diesel is a
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               soaring sativa with plenty of mental clarity. I suggest
                               making a to-do list before rolling a doobie because it’s
                               really easy to check off tasks after toking. Gamers
                               should note that it’s perfect pot for a round of Xbox or
                               PS3 because its effect is speedy and focused. It’s fairly
                               easy to tell that Grapefruit Diesel is a sativa upon quick
                               inspection because the buds are fluffy, but not wispy.




                                                             84
 Great White Shark .
Anticipate an aggressive, lemony, almost acidic stench
that isn’t released until after Great White Shark’s solid
glistening buds are busted. Your nose is going to be bit-
ten by its strong, astringent aroma. Depending on when
the strain is harvested, Great White Shark can be a more
heady high or a heavier body stone; it leans more to-
wards indica when picked early and more towards sativa          G
if picked later. Regardless of this, it’s a fab daytime toker
with an uplifting “get it done” vibe. Developed in 1997,
this strain has become well known and plenty of seed
breeders offer their own version of this cannabis classic.
However, GWS is waning in popularity making it not as
readily available as it once was. I really have to have
Great White Shark for Discovery Channel’s Shark Week,
and, like sharks, these buds are becoming fewer and
fewer. There’s something about toking Great White Shark
and watching sharks that’s just so, well, stoner.




                             85
G                               Green Crack .
                               Stupid stoner naming or simple toker truthing? Some
                               people don’t like the branding of this bud, but I’m not
                               overly offended. Green Crack has a fruity, earthy aroma
                               that’s not overpowering, but not too subtle either. It’s a
                               strong sativa, but it’s not the most potent pot I’ve ever in-
                               haled, and I’ve sampled numerous offerings. Green
                               Crack has an incredible flight time. It gets you up
                               quickly and keeps you there for a while, depending on
                               your tolerance level. The high is all jumpy with little ceil-
                               ing. Green Crack is another offshoot of Skunk #1, exist-
                               ing as clone only for some time. As its lore grew,
                               demand for seeds became heavy, and breeders eventu-
                               ally crossed it with an unknown indica to smooth out an
                               uplifting sativa zip. Buds have a soft, loose structure with
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               plenty of trichomes and heft.
                               I think the name Green Crack
                               complements its unreal
                               zippy effects. Though it’s
                               not deadly, the buzz can
                               certainly disorient
                               people.




                                                            86
G
                                Green Harvest .
                               Not to be confused with the makers of the PollenMaster,
                               Green Harvest is a rough looking, chunky, sensational
                               sativa that produces fantastic smoke. The aroma is very
                               inviting. Green Harvest is an accessible, bright smelling
                               strain, but doesn’t look like one because the buds are
                               really fugly. This shouldn’t be used as a judgement to
                               determine potency: ugly nugs can be awesome too.
                               Green Harvest has a motivational, happy high with
                               plenty of get-up-and-go, go, go! Even the most sluggish
                               person will be happily bopping along in their chair. It’s
                               not a straight shot up, but a nice smooth ride with plenty
                               of chill body relaxation. The moder-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               ate pain relief is an added
                               bonus. Everything about
                               Green Harvest makes
                               it wonderful morning
                               marijuana.




                                                           88
H
 Headband .
Ganja God damn! Headband is a rich hardy toke that
will make your eyes droopy and your lungs ache. Every-
thing about Headband is heavy, including its bud struc-
ture and earthy bouquet. The smell isn’t Headband’s
strong point, but that’s easily overlooked by a stone that
will ground you for hours. Headband has excellent pain
relieving properties, making it great for people with
chronic pain issues. Enthusiasts will love its slow effect
and even the hardiest of potheads will toke out if inhal-
                                                             H
ing too much. This is choice cannabis for before bed.
Headband is extremely delicious with a zesty, sour zing,
which makes it exactly the type of cannabis you’re going
to want to inhale often. The buds have awesome bag ap-
peal; they’re just gorgeous! They are incredibly impene-
trable and sparkle with trichomes. Everyone loves very
sparkly nugs that break up beautifully. A little amount of
bud produces plentiful results, making it more than
worthwhile financially. Reserva Privada Headband, also
known as Sour Kush, is a combination of some stellar ge-
netics as it brings together Sour Diesel and OG Kush.
Parental genetics are not always a sure sign the off-
spring is going to be ganja good, but it does help to
have awesome lineage.




                           91
                                Health Canada .
                               Talk about a stoner score! Only people legally allowed
                               to grow cannabis have access to Health Canada’s mari-
                               juana seeds. My bud buddy Montreal Martin and I met
                               in Vancouver where we discussed ganja genetics. One
                               toke lead to another and he convinced himself to grow
                               Health Canada’s medical marijuana seeds because no
                               one I knew had done it before. At a meeting in Toronto
                               he gifted me with his result: a nug of Health Canada
H                              ganja he grew organically. The plant is really ugly, he
                               says, but produces impressive looking but small buds.
                               This is proof that any ganja grown well can produce
                               stunning results. Health Canada’s seeds are some kind
                               of old school hardy Afghani indica with a powerful pep-
                               pery toker taste; you could season a steak with its pep-
                               pery zeal. The pain relieving properties were excellent
                               and it grounded me beautifully. People will appreciate
                               its nice, slow, sedate stone if they can get through its
                               overbearing peppery taste.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                                                          92
 Hindu Kush .                                                  H
Harsh, chewy and rough-hewn, Hindu Kush continues to
be a stand out strain amongst a crowded Kush field. The
powerfully potent indica has everything Kush lovers talk
about. Scoring high marks as an originator to the Kush
craze with a rich exotic taste, Hindu Kush has flavors that
ride down a smooth silk road before expanding in your
lungs. It’s one of those strains that coined the toker term:
“if you don’t cough you don’t get off.” The strain is a
cannabis classic that can be enjoyed by newcomers and
old-timers alike, especially now, because there’s so
much Kush that, going back to the original, I wanted to
use it as a ganja gauge. Hindu Kush is still one of my all
time top favorites. When I revisited, I
tweeted a note to myself about re-
membering to grow some
Hindu Kush beans in the
future. You should
do the same!




                            93
H




                                Honey Bee .
                               The sweet, succulent smells from Honey Bee will really
                               get your stoner senses tingling. An almost pure sativa
                               with a wonderful weedy scent of earth and honey, it has
                               a surprisingly heavy, rich and dense toke for an uplifting
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               euphoric high. These gorgeous buds will brighten any-
                               one’s day – especially after they’re inhaled! Honey Bee
                               creates a very happy buzz and a mental alertness that
                               probably makes it perfect pot for people with depres-
                               sion or stress issues. My physical stress began to disap-
                               pear completely with my muscles becoming much more
                               relaxed after a session. The tension in my upper back
                               lessened dramatically and I was able to do some
                               stretches. Honey Bee sure is a hard worker when it
                               comes to keeping you high and happy.



                                                          94
I
 Ice Cream .
When you spark up these nugs, anticipate a rich, creamy
cannabis flavor that truly is akin to eating an ice cream
cone. Savvy stoners should seek out this strain’s small
hints of vanilla flavors when taking a deep inhale. It’s best
to use clean toker utensils to get the best out of the smoke
and to appreciate the strong piney taste riding overtop of
these vanilla tones. Many enthusiasts will also smell san-
dalwood or incense. Ice Cream nugs are not soft at all;
they have an incredible robust heft to them. This is beauti-
ful, classic, chunky monkey weed with bright, bold red          I
hairs. After a session, you’ll most likely experience feel-
ings of mental relaxation and some wonderful, mellow,
meditative qualities. This great calming effect is just like
the one you get from eating comfort food.




                             97
 I
                                Ice Kush .
                               The zesty, Kushy goodness from Ice Kush is going to
                               linger on your toker taste buds long after the joint has
                               finished its rounds. It’s not aggressive, harsh tasting or
                               rough on your lungs, but may cause some potheads to
                               cough. Ice Kush is a hardy toke that produces luscious,
                               thick vapor and smoke. A resinous and sticky strain, but
                               the buds will easily break up beautifully. Solid nugs that
                               look just like Hindu Kush cover up the slick Durban Poi-
                               son high that comes out to play 20 minutes after inhal-
                               ing. Ice Kush is a fantastic hybrid because it starts out as
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               a slow and steady sedate stone but ends on a zippy
                               high. However, the couch-lock and laziness makes it a
                               real cannabis challenge to do anything more than hang-
                               ing out on Twitter, Instagram, Facebook and YouTube.




                                                            98
                                                              I


 Island Sweet Skunk .
Though Island Sweet Skunk appears and hits just like an
indica, it’s a savory, mostly sativa strain. For people who
associate the smell of Skunk with weed, this strain is the
perfect pot. Skunk lovers are going to love smelling
their ISS stash, which has a fairly rancid, sickly sweet
Skunk stink – although I’ve never understood associat-
ing sweetness with Skunk. When you encounter an ac-
tual skunk you don’t think, “what a nice sweet aroma; I’d
like to inhale more.” Island Sweet Skunk tastes espe-
cially robust when ripped in a bong. The first vapor bag
is amazing, but I did notice a considerable drop in the
second. Island Sweet Skunk’s complex flavors are best
described as sugary and musky, and can be an acquired
toker taste. The smoke is rather expansive and heavy,
and after a session it made me feel kind of lazy; not
tired, but not motivated to do much. I felt like a lump.
This is wonderful weed for movie watching or doing
something relaxing without much thinking involved.

                           101
J
                                                             J
 Jack Flash .
A complex, woody smelling cannabis capable of pro-
ducing expressive flavorful tokes, Jack Flash has a very
muted or closed aroma. Even after busting some buds,
you might not smell it. Upon closer examination Jack
Flash will have you thinking it has to be an indica; heavy
dense buds with beautiful, delicate red hairs. Only when
you get halfway through your session do you begin to
realize it’s not an indica, but instead a very heady high.
Jack Flash has an extravagant, clear-headed high that’s
both talkative and social. It’s great party weed because
potheads will start to wax poetically, politically or even
incoherently. There’s nothing better than doobie discus-
sions before, after and during a session.




                           103
J                               Jack Herer .
                               The alluringly lively, spicy Haze smells comprising Sensi
                               Seeds’ Jack Herer marijuana strain are some of its
                               strongest traits. This is a powerful smelling and potent,
                               soaring sativa with a fantastic indica side to smooth out
                               its zip. Jack Herer is a great strain for productive pot-
                               heads as a nice steady high awaits. There are legs to its
                               high and just a little bowl of the exceedingly heavy nugs
                               goes a long way in creating an enlightening session. The
                               taste is exceptionally spicy, much like its aroma. Though
                               Jack Herer is predominantly a sativa stone, the buds have
                               an indica structure that’s packed with pistils and the bud
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               density does a great job at protecting delicate tri-
                               chomes. Jack Herer’s upbeat flavor and flight is perfect
                               for morning wake and bake sessions. Whether you’re
                               running off to work afterwards or spending the day
                               around the house, it’s a perfect “get stuff done” stone.




                                                          104
                                Jack Jean Guy .
                               A private head stash I just had to pick up to explore, Jack
                               Jean Guy blends one of my favorite strains, Jean Guy,
                               with Jack Herer to create an interesting and tasty off-
                               spring. My expectations were so high that I was actually
                               pleasantly surprised to find that I wasn’t let down by it.
                               Then again, anything influenced by Jean Guy has to be
                               good, right? The exceedingly heavy looking buds ap-
                               peared beautiful with their flecks of orange trichomes.
                               When the rock solid nugs are busted, Jean Guy’s unique
                               floral spiciness rises up and takes over, completely
J                              blowing away the lively Jack Herer flavors that ride qui-
                               etly underneath. The very distinguishable dank has an
                               attention grabbing, uplifting buzz before crashing into a
                               couch-locker. You’re going to ride your furniture while
                               your head is in the clouds. Your mind is going to drift,
                               and some stoners are really going to space out and be-
                               come slack jawed. Jack Jean Guy proved to work excel-
                               lently on my fibromyalgia symptoms with my pain levels
                               dropping dramatically.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                                                          106
 Jack Skunk .                                                   J
A pungent skunky smelling sativa, Jack Skunk has a no-
table nug flavor and an unbelievably introspective “think
about your life” effect. This pot allows you to ponder
problems in a different perspective. Unfortunately, it
doesn’t last long enough to become a very deep thinker.
The smooth Jack Herer flavors are influenced nicely by
Skunk #1 to create a delicious original toke. It’s not a ran-
cid Skunk, but a sweet one, and sweet Skunks are not my
favorites; I like a rank Skunk flavor with a harsh, eye-wa-
tering toke. Jack Skunk does cause some lung expanding
cough on the exhale, but not much.




                            107
                                Jas Bud .
                               The first thing you’ll notice about this popular Vancou-
                               ver toke is that Jas Bud impressively sparkles with
                               cannabis crystals. Like some kind of Tiffany diamond, it’s
                               very ganja glittery! An indica dominant strain and a
                               heavy resin producer, Cash Crop Ken’s Jas Bud (Kish x
                               Burmese) has a unique, but not overpowering floral and
                               earthy aroma. The scent is barely noticeable, but is fruity
                               smooth. When vaporized, Jas Bud starts out with soft flo-
                               ral berry tones then ends with a fairly forceful after bite.
                               It’s not as acidic or pineapple tasting as Kish, but way
J                              more earth-y smooth from the Burmese parent. The fla-
                               vor is berry unique and doesn’t fall off. Just a little Jas
                               Bud goes far, creating great value for your hard earned
                               cannabis coin. The buzz is mostly a slow moving, rolling
                               stone with excellent mental focus. Fantastic weed for
                               slow, focused, creative activities.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                                                           108
                                                                J

 Jorge Cervantes’ Diamonds .
Sparkly, shiny and very pretty to look at, Jorge Cer-
vantes’ Diamonds is the perfect addition to an engage-
ment party; just add the ring (and the bong) and you’re
all set to ask a budbabe to marry you. Not just an im-
pressive looking cannabis strain, JCD has everything
stoners want in wicked, wild weed. Jorge’s Diamonds
has a uniquely soft and sweet floral taste that is really
exceptional. It’s a totally original tasting, indica-heavy
strain with a great soaring, stratospheric zip. This is not a
sativa skyrocketing effect; instead JCD has a calm, relax-
ing, mentally clearing cannabis high. People with
chronic pain problems are going to be able to sit in a
chair comfortably after a session without becoming
mentally dull. Your head is way in the clouds, but your
body never leaves the runway.




                            109
J
                                Juicy Fruit .
                               These hefty, chunky nugs have a commercial berry tast-
                               ing toke that isn’t as exotic as other types of berry-fla-
                               vored marijuana available. It’s kind of bland and boring.
                               After sampling a wide variety of berry strains, Juicy
                               Fruit doesn’t measure up as top notch nug; it’s good
                               ganja, but not great grass. In the high category, Juicy
                               Fruit is well balanced between sativa and indica. The
                               strain has an okay body stone and provides some pain
                               relief without any mental fogginess. However, like the
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               gum, its effects are not long lasting. It’s a quick surge,
                               but then falls off quickly. Juicy Fruit’s heavy and beauti-
                               ful bag appealing buds make it a commercial cropper
                               for fruity flavored strains. The chances of encountering it
                               on your strain hunt are excellent.




                                                          110
J                               Justin Bieber Kush .
                               Kush is about as mainstream as Justin Bieber these days
                               so it doesn’t come as much of a shock that someone (in
                               this case Cannabis As Living Medicine in Canada)
                               would market a J.B. Kush. This is just your regular, old
                               world tasting Kush cannabis: nothing too spectacular.
                               The taste is a pure Kush assault with each toke lighting
                               up your taste buds like its namesake’s stage show. It’s
                               not too overpowering in any department, but not too
                               bland either. The indica stone dropped my chronic pain
                               levels several notches without making me too groggy, as
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               it’s an alert active high with wonderful grounding prop-
                               erties. However, like most Kushes, you will enjoy losing
                               track of time after toking it. Kush really has become the
                               Justin Bieber of bud, meaning that whether or not you’re
                               interested, it’s everywhere. The strain dominates doobie
                               awards and is being bred into everything, like the band
                               with a sound that everyone else decides to copy.




                                                         112
K
                                K-Train .
                               Depending on when it’s harvested, K-Train will lean to-
K                              wards either a Trainwreck sativa or an OG Kush indica.
                               When it’s more sativa, anticipate an exceedingly strong
                               Haze-like spiciness that is just delicious. This was an ex-
                               ceedingly spicy sample with hints of earthy undertones.
                               K-Train has tremendously complex flavors and aromas.
                               My specific sample was a Trainwreck experience; soar-
                               ing, uplifting, motivational marijuana with pleasant body
                               sensations too. Although my sample was very sativa, the
                               chunky buds were purely indica in their appearance. K-
                               Train is usually more indica dominant, but this sample
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               just happened to be more sativa leaning. The up time is
                               lengthy with the soaring sensation giving way to a
                               groovy, relaxed and mellow chill vibe.




                                                          114
 King’s Purple .
This strain is a delicious, earthy Kush cannabis combo of
two stellar indica strains, King’s Kush and Purple Kush.
There are few noticeable traits from the Purple Kush
side and the pure indica nugs don’t release their strong
Kush odor until busted. When you do bust them, the
earthy Kush smells twinkle your nose with their wild,
weedy essence. Buds are loaded down with massive
amounts of trichomes, making King’s Purple a Kush
lover’s dream. One joint will have many fanatics peace-
fully dreaming and others losing track of several hours.
Days and nights just melt away after a session of King’s
Purple. Besides a great ganja stink and stone, KP is also
an over the top toke of pure Kush greatness. Plenty of            K
dealers will refer to their wares as King’s Purple regard-
less of whether it’s true or not; however, if it’s stellar pot,
why not give them the benefit of the doobie doubt?




                             115
K
                                Kish .
                               Cash Crop Ken’s husky Kish nugs have an authentic
                               fruity aroma that has hints of blueberry, but also some-
                               thing different that’s hard to put your finger on. Kish is an
                               exceptional berry toke that is neither too harsh nor too
                               soft. The best is that its flavor lasts all the way to the end.
                               The indica dominant plant has a strong, slow down med-
                               itative stone. Kish quiets my mind and allows me to focus
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               when I’m feeling mentally scattered. After a long hard
                               day, coming home to Kish makes it all better. Your work
                               day stress can be gone as fast you can roll and inhale.
                               Kish is a great kick back, put some tunes on, personal
                               toker time weed. It’s an excellent example of a dense
                               and tasty indica.




                                                            116
 Kushberry .                                                 K
Anticipate your dense Kushberry nugs making a ‘plunk’
sound when dropped – they really are that heavy! The
firm, dank buds are packed with an incredible amount of
powerful Kush goodness. The flavor is slamming OG
Kush with soft hints of fruity Blueberry, which is an awe-
some addition to the Kush genetics. Kushberry has very
excellent stoner and medical qualities. Professional pot-
heads will twig to its couch-locking properties that are
long lasting, making it perfect pot for a movie night.
Kushberry gets you good and stoned, especially when
it’s ripped in a nice clean bong. Its pain relieving prop-
erties are fantastic and make sitting much easier for me.
Kushberry is a potent slow-a-stoner-down indica, to the
point where new potheads should be peacefully slum-
bering after a hit or three.




                           117
L
 L.S.D. .
Barney’s Farm’s L.S.D. is an amazingly smooth but, of
course, trippy stone; a euphoric, creative couch-locker.
Your feet are firmly grounded while your head is danc-
ing in the clouds. These astonishingly upbeat qualities
mesh perfectly with the soft sedate ones so it doesn’t
become unpleasant. L.S.D. is great for social functions      L
because cannabis enthusiasts become chatty rather
than sleepy; anticipate that the room will get very loud
as people become lit up with excitable chatter. It does,
however, induce the munchies something fierce. The
pumping taste is sharp, but not Skunky, with a delightful
hash-like after bite. L.S.D. has an incredible aggressive,
sweet, pungent Skunky aroma. Its robust stench gets
your stoner senses salivating. Once encountered you
will always remember L.S.D. because it has a consider-
able flashback quality, if there is such a thing: you’re
trekking around, not having toked some in a while, when
your stoner senses become all twigged out in a good
way. Barney’s Farm created L.S.D. from a combination of
an old Skunk #1 and Mazar-i-Sharif to create a weirdly
indica dominant strain with plenty of fascinating sativa
traits. The longer flowering phenotype has an even
spacier stone. Everyone who encounters L.S.D. falls in
love and without a doubt it’s a creative couch-locker
worthy of its name. Psych pot like no other.

                           119
                                LA Confidential .
                               There’s no confidentiality regarding the fact that DNA
L                              Genetics’ intense, hunky indica, LA Confidential, is al-
                               most perfectly flawless. Nearly everything about this
                               amazing cannabis strain makes it an A-list entry. You will
                               notice an overpowering, coarse, earthy funk with subtle
                               hints of Afghani or Kush lingering just beneath the sur-
                               face. This cannabis celebrity announces its presence
                               with an exotic, one-of- a-kind aroma. Your senses will tin-
                               gle in anticipation as you’re rolling because buds release
                               an incredible earthy, hash-y richness. LA Confidential’s
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               first rip destroys plenty of potheads with its awesome-
                               ness. Even for enthusiasts, their regular bong load be-
                               comes a one-hitter quitter. Most heads may have
                               problems finishing their regular joints, and doobies will
                               be a resinous gooey mess before you’re through. LA
                               Confidential is a downward destroyer so it’s important to
                               keep munchies and other important items like phones
                               nearby, because if you need something chances are your
                               couch-locked ass won’t be able to travel far after toking.




                                                          120
                                Lavender Kush .
                               Oh my! Yes, indeed it does smell like real Lavender with
                               hints of Kush. The flowery perfume is overwhelmingly
L                              pleasant. It’s not a mild odor, but a lovely, extraordinary,
                               excessive lavender stench easily capable of stinking up
                               a room. Lavender Kush does have a deceptive lung
                               tickle, which feels a little strange as something so beau-
                               tiful smelling shouldn’t have harshness; beware that
                               bong rips may cause coughing fits. Points are awarded
                               for having an excellent “if you don’t cough, you don’t get
                               off” quality. Lavender Kush produces a heavy, thick and
                               deliciously yummy toke while the vibe picks up speed
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               quickly. You’ll find yourself suddenly flying, but not
                               going anywhere. You’re not locked in place; just feeling
                               inward. The relaxing introspective buzz had me happily
                               staring into space. This is wonderful weed for medita-
                               tion or other sedate slow activities. Unfortunately, Laven-
                               der Kush is currently a private breeder stock making it
                               difficult to find for now.




                                                           122
 Legends Ultimate Indica .
The first thing you’re going to notice about Legends Ulti-
mate Indica is its mellow, slow-you-down stone because
it has very little odor and taste. Worst of all, it looks like
your standard, run of the mill indica with tight compact
buds that do little to distinguish themselves from other
indicas. The dull flavors are very smooth and will tickle
up your pothead palate in a manner few strains do. How-
ever, LUI is very deceiving because the downward stone
is where this legendary strain wallops the cannabis
competition. Ultimate Indica doesn’t make you sleepy; it
puts you straight to sleep by cranking you past the “se-
date” stage very quickly and heads directly on to bed-
time. Too much of this hardy heavy stone and you will
wake up some time the next day fully rested and possi-           L
bly late for work. Many of my writing sessions have
ended because the downward slow vibe is so creative
zapping; the weedy words would just stop flowing after a
Volcano vaporizer canister. Legends Ultimate Indica is
wonderful stone-y weed.




                             123
                                Lemon Amnesia .
                               Oh boy, something that may cause forgetfulness. Who
                               doesn’t want to forget their problems from time to time
L                              with some toking? Lemon Amnesia has excellent astrin-
                               gent, acidic aromas and these loud, lemony smells cer-
                               tainly don’t disappoint when it comes to inhaling. My
                               first vapor bag was potent and popping with soaring
                               sativa yumminess. The Amnesia Haze side provides a
                               pleasant, almost trippy stone that goes straight to your
                               dome, making this wonderful weed to smoke before
                               kicking back to watch something very visual like a sci-fi
                               movie. Something with plenty of colors really adds to
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               the Lemon Amnesia vibe. The best thing here is that
                               there are no jittery or uncomfortable soaring side ef-
                               fects, which is something I detest in sativa doobies. I’ve
                               learned to live with this problem by not over-toking
                               them, but with Lemon Amnesia, this isn’t even an issue.




                                                          124
 Lemon Kush .
Not the smelliest Kush, but one of the most astringent
tasting I’ve ever come across. The lemon scent isn’t very
noticeable even when busted into a fine pot powder.
Though Lemon Kush may lack a scent, it’s easily over-
looked because its potency and taste are one step be-
yond. It’s a real lemon zinger that is going to light up
your mouth with a fresh sour flavor and explosive Kush
undertones. The adorable astringent zest can only be
found in citrus tinged cannabis strains. Lemon Kush is
mostly an indica strain, making it great for late after-
noons or evenings. Reach for Lemon Kush near the end
of your day, as it’s a sit down and relax kind of stone; I
drank a large coffee before my session and still had
some problems getting tasks done. My pain levels             L
dropped dramatically, but I also had an unproductive
feeling. Lemon Kush is not a choice selection for wake
and bakes (duh!), but other than that there’s nothing
weedy wrong with this zesty, lemon-y fresh toke.




                           125
                                Lilac Kush .
                               The heavenly heavy Lilac Kush holds absolutely nothing
L                              back. Her wonderful flowery scent is overpowering with
                               an up time and flavor that are both equally as impres-
                               sive. The smell is similar to lilacs, making it easily recog-
                               nizable, but this was a private breeder’s creation, so its
                               availability is limited. When I left my stash jar open, this
                               great Kush smelled up my space something fierce, and
                               potheads miles away had to be wondering where that
                               weed dank was coming from. Lilac Kush buds have
                               plenty of trichomes that produce a complex taste that’s
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               electric: phenomenal Kush perfumes explode immedi-
                               ately upon inhaling. The taste lingers in your mouth and
                               the dank doesn’t fade quickly, hanging around long
                               after a joint has been extinguished. While you’re happily
                               buzzing, anticipate the zesty flavor and aroma calling
                               you back for one more. Lilac Kush has an expansive high
                               with endless possibilities and no paranoia, which is es-
                               pecially good considering that, because of how tasty it
                               is, you tend to toke way more than you intend to. I know I
                               did! Lilac Kush is fantastically relaxing and perfect for
                               lazy afternoons where weed napping is possible.

                                                           126
M
                                M39 .
                               Anticipate straight up solid, dense nugs with little flavor.
                               Unless it’s grown correctly – and it almost never is – this
                               strain is to be avoided. M39 has everything a commer-
                               cial cropper is seeking; fast flowering, weighty, easy to
                               grow nugs with big bud bag appeal. The downside is
                               that it has little to offer the toker, unless grown properly.
                               However, when not produced by cannabis clowns, M39
                               can be a very enjoyable toke. You will be surprised how
                               good the bud is when grown correctly; I know I am. The
                               astringent taste can be brought out to the point where it
                               makes your face tingle, especially if you exhale through
                               your nose. If it’s too acidic – or not cured or flushed
                               properly – your nose will light up like Rudolph the Red
                               Nosed Reindeer. M39’s lazy stone is great for people
                               who want to sit in their easy chair totally slack jawed.
M                              The best thing about it is that M39 is an affordable pain
                               reliever. Plenty of chronic pain sufferers I know reach for
                               M39 because it is the best relief for both pain and
                               stretched finances.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                                                           128
 Mango .
The first hit of Mango is a hardy, heady one and should     M
be packed with ripe melon richness. Mango produces a
mind blowing, slightly savory toke worthy of a new
vapor bag. The fruity flavors, like Mango’s uplifting
zippy high, are excessive and exceedingly intense.
Mango has a euphoric, energetic effect and is ideal in
social settings because of its chatty cannabis high. Peo-
ple who feel a little blue or are suffering from too much
winter will really enjoy Mango’s mood enhancing effect.
Fluffy light green buds have plenty of orange and red
trichomes that are covered in crystals. Mango is an ex-
cellent addition for any professional pothead’s breakfast
because a bong rip, joint or vaporizer session will have
you flying out the door without a jittery “too much cof-
fee” effect.




                          129
 Master Kush .
The incredible earthy Kush dank busting out of Master
Kush buds lets you know that it’s a cut above all others.    M
MK gets your toker taste buds tingling right away as
they anticipate its succulent, opulent, deep Kush flavors.
Pound for pound, Master Kush nugs are beyond solid,
and are possibly some of the most dense nugs you’re
going to come across in your hunt. Even better is the
fact that a small amount goes a long way. However, the
taste and stone is so amazing you’re probably going to
toke more than you normally would. Master Kush is best
rolled in a joint because the smoke is creamier in a joint
than as vapor. Long drawn out hauls on joints are a sure-
fire way to feel heavy and rested and, by the end, your
joint will be a resinous, gooey mess. It’s a sedate stone,
very mellow and sluggish, that lets you just sink into a
couch and unwind for a good long time. Several seed
breeders offer their own Master Kush, a cross of Hindu
Kush and Skunk.



                           131
                                Max OG Kush .
                               A fascinating take on a familiar strain, Max OG Kush is a
                               flavorful and phenomenal toke that Kush-loving pot-
                               heads will twig to. The buds create an incredible slug-
M                              gish feeling that slows down both your body and your
                               mind. Be prepared to roll into bed after toking and be
                               warned that Max OG Kush is not a social stone at all; it’s
                               a slack jawed, fall-out-of-your-chair stone. The second
                               and third vapor bags are equally as powerful as the first,
                               with a lung expanding vapor that will for sure cause
                               many cannabis enthusiasts to cough and get off. Max
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               OG Kush doesn’t look much different to any of the other
                               OG Kush strains on the market, making it a challenge to
                               say how an enthusiast could differentiate between Max
                               OG and OG Kush when buying.




                                                          132
 Medi Kush .
A surprisingly strong Kush tasting strain with an interest-
ing and creative couch-lock, Medi Kush is a combination       M
of two great strains, OG Kush and SAGE, and has some
people referring to it as “Kushage” in their cannabis cir-
cles. Regardless of what you call it, it’s phenomenal, and
given its creative roar someone could have given it a
better marijuana moniker. However, people with chronic
pain problems will really twig to Medi Kush’s pain re-
ducing properties, making it easy for med pot people to
remember the strain name. Medi Kush really dropped
my screaming spine pain and stoners will really enjoy
its get-on-up, get-on-your-good-foot high. I was chair
dancing! This is feel good ganja, making everything feel
alright. The mental soar and pain relief make Medi Kush
wonderful weed for pained people, but it’s also a great
Friday night toke. This strain gives a social stone with
confidence boosting properties, perfect for meeting
new people.



                           133
                                Medi Saint .
                               When it comes to relieving pain, Medi Saint is a minor
                               ganja godsend. A chronic pain solving strain, it’s some
                               kind of Kush. You’ll get exactly what you would expect
                               from commercial Kush; a sedate, stoned, heavy eyelid
                               feeling combined with a spectacular Kush taste. Com-
                               pressed, packed indica buds break up into beautiful fluff
                               to create great burning joints. Roaches are a resinous
                               mess and anticipate a gooey substance staining your fin-
                               gers. Medi Saint creates a heavy rich resinous smoke or
                               vapor that is fairly flavorful, but burned when I blew it
                               out my nose. The grounding stone eliminates plenty of
                               hours and it’s best to keep necessary items nearby be-
                               fore you start your session because Medi Saint makes it
                               easy to become one with the furniture.

M
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                                                         134
    –          –
 Menage-a-Trois .
Unfortunately, this strain is not as thrilling as the name
implies. This private breeder stash was sold to me as a
sativa, but it had a flaccid vibe, which is the complete
opposite of its branding potential. The dense, chunky
and pretty buds had no sativa characteristics at all.        M
Menage-a-Trois is a hybrid, I was told, that leans more
sativa than indica. However it was a sedate, slow and
sluggish stone with an Afghani wilderness taste. It’s a
harsh toke lacking any delicateness, with plenty of lung
expansion. A lung tickler that some people may have a
hard time inhaling, Menage-a-Trois does go the distance
in keeping a buzz going.




                           135
                                Mountain Top .
                               You’d never get to the top of the mountain inhaling
M                              Mountain Top, an oddly named strain because it makes
                               you think that it must be a soaring sativa. Instead it’s a
                               slow, sluggish, sedate indica with little toker taste, mak-
                               ing it very indistinguishable from other sluggish bland
                               indica strains. The buds have great bag appeal with
                               their beautiful red and green coloring. The red tri-
                               chomes really stand out against the lush green to create
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               a classic cannabis look and feel, and Mountain Top also
                               produces an intense foggy vapor bag. However, looks
                               are deceiving as it’s barely above mid range. Think Seri-
                               ous Seeds’ Chronic crossed with some kind of wispy
                               sativa.




                                                          136
 Mr. Nice       x   Blueberry .
The spicy and fruity aroma from this fascinating cross is
really going to bring a smile to your face. Your day will   M
instantly brighten once the buds are busted and be-
come even better once you start inhaling, as the bold
flavors give way to a soaring, uplifting high. Mr. Nice x
Blueberry buds are exceedingly dense and chunky, es-
pecially for a strong sativa. They did break up into pow-
dery dust but still produced a powerful vapor bag of
awesomeness. Besides a zippy buzz, I had a serious case
of the munchies, so I broke out my favorite munchie so-
lution, which is cereal, while I wrote up a review. Put
some tunes on and toke out!




                          137
N
 Nebula .
Nebula’s unique floral smells don’t become readily ap-
parent until after it’s been busted. Once they are, how-
ever, beware! It’s capable of stinking up your session
space with a pungent yet fruity aroma. Nebula tastes as
appetizing as it smells. Anticipate a yummy, firm, fruity
burst with a stupendously soft and tasty afterglow. Para-    N
dise Seeds created Nebula in 1996 as a mostly sativa va-
riety. The somewhat fluffy, resinous buds twinkle with a
ganja galaxy of trichomes. Nebula is uplifting, but not
stupidly soaring. You’ll get a nice overall mental and
body buzz on. It’s relaxing, yet you remain functional and
mostly in control, making this strain excellent weed for
afternoon 4/20 sessions. Nebula is the strain to reach for
when there is still work to do (but it’s work that can be
done with a buzz). It’s definitely a daytime strain, not a
nighttime toke.




                           139
                                Northern Satellite .
                               A delicious berry-scented strain, Northern Satellite also
                               has plenty of pine aromatic depth to it. The aroma be-
                               comes even bolder once the firm but fluffy buds are
                               busted. The lively smell is very memorable and your
                               taste buds will marvel at how great this marijuana tastes.
N                              The Northern Lights influence made this a more enjoy-
                               able toke for me than just Blue Satellite on its own. The
                               flavors were more pronounced, long lasting and rich
                               and the smoke tastes so exotic and exquisite you’ll end
                               up getting through your stash fast. Northern Satellite is a
                               solid hybrid. Its tender sativa trichomes were well pro-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               tected by a solid indica structure. The buds have some
                               weight to them, but also retain a lovely softness. There’s
                               a little amount of resin and they break up into a fine
                               powder, so beware if you use a coffee grinder for your
                               wake and bake session. It’s an awake but body buzzing
                               stone; Northern Satellite made sitting at a computer
                               much easier for me, and the high increased my attention
                               to detail.




                                                          140
 Nouveau Kush .
“Wow, now that’s a really strong Kush” is the kind of re-
sponse you want to hear when you’re puff, puff, passing
to your bud buddies. Nouveau Kush will get you positive
Kush props from fellow potheads because the buds have
a rough Afghani Hindu Kush look and feel that requires a
pair of scissors rather than a grinder to break them up.
Some strains will just gum up grinders something
chronic and this is definitely one of them. The chunky
smoke creates a very hardy toke and a heavy, lazy stone.
Nouveau Kush will sap all your energy and make you
feel exceedingly lethargic. I became a stoner slug and
totally anti-social, and I discovered this is perfect pot for
personal toking time. I wanted nothing more than to kick
back in my easy chair and watch a movie. Nouveau Kush
is potent pain relieving reefer or a substantial Kush
stone for enthusiasts.
                                                                N




                            141
                                Nuken .
                               This popular Vancouver pot is packed with a sweet taste
                               and a relaxing but clear-headed crunch. There’s no loss
                               of mental activity after a session, making it ideal for a
                               wake and bake smoke. Nuken’s moderate zip goes some
N                              distance and depending on your commute it might have
                               really mellowed by the time you arrive at work. Many
                               potheads might think Nuken is a sativa, but it’s an indica
                               dominant strain with bright, floral aromas and flavors.
                               Something about its very berry, but not fruity taste,
                               makes Nuken feel like a sativa. The solid buds don’t
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               pack much of a smell until busted; then they release a
                               subtle smell, but nothing overpowering. Overall, Nuken
                               is an enjoyable and complex toke ideal for rushing
                               through your day.




                                                          142
O
                                OG Kush .
                               As you will probably already know, this is the most com-
                               mon cannabis currently available in North America.
                               Every dealer has it, even when they don’t – if you know
                               what I mean. OG Kush has exploded in popularity
                               thanks to its amazing qualities, celebrity hype and, obvi-
                               ously, everyone growing it. There was a time when it was
                               difficult to score, and it was only available to the
                               cannabis “in” crowd. Now several seed breeders offer
O                              their own version of OG Kush, confusing the market-
                               place, but also satisfying the demands. The Kush lineage
                               is very expansive. All buds labeled OG Kush will be ex-
                               ceedingly dense and coated in trichomes, even if
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               they’re not the real article. They’ll make a thud when
                               dropped. Commercial crops (like the one pictured)
                               grown with too much nutrients will still have a distinct
                               Kush odor and taste, which is sour and earthy with hints
                               of pine. Once you’ve inhaled and experienced this
                               strain you’ll consistently recognize it, or at least be able
                               to tell the bud is some kind of Kush. Everything about
                               OG Kush and Kush in general is memorable. The high is
                               uplifting with a strong body buzz. Rookie tokers may
                               green out or become too stoned, so be careful how
                               much you inhale.

                                                           144
 OG Raskal .
This strain is very similar looking to traditional OG Kush
nugs and it will probably fool even the most profes-
sional pothead until busted. OG Raskal (also known as
Raskal OG) has hints of pine in its aroma that aren’t
found in the original Kush strains. You can only find the
piney Fire Kush smell when it’s busted up, but when you
do, expect a wonderful marijuana medley of lemon,
Kush and pine. Though the buds look very much like OG
Kush, the stone is much different. OG Raskal has amaz-
ing couch-locking properties and will surely sit down
even the hardiest of tokers. However, there’s a slight
sativa edge to it that ensures you won’t be slumbering.
The gentle, uplifting effect is perfect for people who
have pain problems who still need to go about their day.
It’s a shame OG Raskal is more easily accessible on the
west coast than in the east because it has serious dank
that east coast Kush lovers would adore.

                                                             O




                           145
                                OG Star .
                               OG Star has powerful OG Kush smells and flavors that
                               overpower the Sensi Star side of this unique hybrid in
                               terms of smell and flavor. The enjoyable, crisp taste has
O                              an acidic aftertaste that is kind of lemony. After lighting
                               up your toker taste buds, the coarse sensation will linger
                               for a good long while – a very long while, actually. Those
                               who dare to blow through their nose will get a good nos-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               tril burn. The rough, hardy, hefty buds lean more to-
                               wards Paradise Seeds’ potent indica (Sensi Star) in
                               appearance and weight. It’s a comfortable body relaxer
                               with fabulous mental alertness; a great social high. The
                               stone, like the flavor, also has legs. For many, one toke
                               might send them over the line, but the experienced
                               heads will appreciate how little of this strain is required
                               for a great ride. OG Star shines on.




                                                          146
 OG-18 .
The OG-18 is a standard upon which all Kush strains
should be judged. When enthusiasts dream about Kush
they should dream only about OG-18. This is the Kush
marijuana master! The buds have an incredible amount
of heft to them. When broken, they’ll release an intense,
room-filling smell. Its acidic, lemony aroma will make
even the most professional of marijuana enthusiasts
                                                               O
drool. OG-18 has a zesty, fuel like flavor that is nothing
but pure Kush greatness. This Reserva Privada strain
lights up your whole face; your nose, lungs and cheeks
will tingle. Your toker taste buds will thank you. It tastes
so yum, I took heaping lungfuls that resulted in a mas-
sive coughing attack that I knew would happen. I ex-
pelled half of my hit before it even hit my lungs, but my
taste buds certainly enjoyed it! OG-18 is not a soaring
sativa nor is it a sedate stone. Instead, it creates a nice,
relaxing chill vibe. An excellent stress reliever that’s
great for when you come home from work, although
your whole day will be spent anticipating the moment
you can inhale.



                            147
                                OGiesel .
                               The Cali Connection’s efforts at fattening up OG Kush by
                               breeding in some Skunk genetics has created a zealous
                               Kush smell and outlandish stone. Even the smallest
                               amount of OGiesel is going to give you away in public,
                               kind of like a skunk crossing your path. I normally smell
                               like weed, but this had potheads making comments and
                               staring at me on public transit. The wonderful stench is
                               going to stink to high heaven, which is exactly where
                               your mind and body are headed after grinding it up and
                               inhaling your joint. The effects are that of a skyrocketing
O                              sativa. The accelerated oomph of OGiesel might be too
                               powerful for some people and it has a stressful anxiety
                               side if you inhale too much. However, it is great for get-
                               ting stuff done, whatever your stuff may be. The buzz is
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               very active, but I could barely sit still long enough to put
                               words and wisdom down. Distinct sativa buds are
                               packed with plenty of red trichomes; you think they’re
                               wispy and lightweight, but upon closer inspection you’ll
                               notice they do have some chunkiness. The Cali Connec-
                               tion’s OGiesel is an awesome improvement on some al-
                               ready great ganja.




                                                           148
 Orangina .
Wow, the orange coloring to this cannabis strain is al-
most unreal. Did someone spill orange drink on this
dank? It sure looks like it, because the bright Orangina
nugs practically glow in an unreal fashion. Orangina has
a strong citrus flavor that may bring tears to some ston-
ers’ eyes. It’s not an artificial orange flavor, but an ex-
ceedingly zingy California Orange that tokers will truly
want to savor. Best of all is the fact that the taste lingered
for what seemed like forever and built up progressively
as the session continued. Much to my surprise, Orangina
is a sedate indica and not an uplifting sativa. Unfortu-
nately, this mistake put me down after my wake and
bake writing session. Not even a double dose of my
usual coffee input could save my ass. The cannabis col-
oring really threw me, making me believe Orangina had
to be a sativa. Don’t make this mistake if you have to be
somewhere in the morning, but if it’s your day off toke
some Orangina and call it a morning... or a whole day.
                                                                 O




                             149
P
 P Dawg .
The lovely ChemDawg fuel tinge is toned down and per-
fectly combined with fruity Pineapple Chunk to create a
wholly unique strain bursting with bizarre flavors. Pot-
heads who don’t like a chemically aftertaste will really
like P Dawg, as it is more akin to pineapple expressions     P
than metallic pot pollution. Nugs are much fatter than
ChemDawg and have a rough outdoorsy look to them. P
Dawg is great for afternoon sessions because it’s physi-
cally sedate with no mental fogginess. In fact, there’s
some mental clarity to this cannabis strain that’s rarely
found in weed. After a session it was really easy to focus
on assignments and even on completing mundane office
tasks. I’m not sure if this makes P Dawg the cannabis
strain of office managers, but it might.




                           151
                                Papaya .
                               Less fruity smelling than other mango-scented strains,
                               Papaya makes up for this with a powerful indica hit. The
                               smoke is opulent and heavy and the concentrated fruit
                               flavors really overwhelm your taste buds. Papaya’s hardy
                               toke is equally matched by its mellow, zone-out buzz.
                               This isn’t a social stone, unless you want to chill out in a
                               dark room in the company of fellow cannabis enthusi-
                               asts. Papaya’s potent, pain-relieving indica stone can
P                              easily put down the hardiest of potheads. Immediately
                               after my first vapor bag I began feeling very rested and
                               I zoned out for a while thinking of weedy words to write
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               down. Anticipate a minor munchie attack and have
                               snacks nearby as you might not be able to get up from
                               the couch. Crazily, Papaya buds don’t look like they’ll
                               pack a potent punch, but they do. You’ve been fore-
                               warned.




                                                           152
 Pink Kush .
Pink Kush is filled with soft scents, earthy flavors and of
course, Kushy ganja greatness. The doobies are divine
and pain relieving with excellent sedative qualities. This
is the one to toke when your pain reaches unbearable
levels. For my recreational friends it’s a full on couch-
locker with very little to no motivating properties. The
stone melts away hours and eats up plenty of time, so
you’re not going to get much done after a Pink Kush ses-
sion. For some enthusiasts the effects will go long into
the day or night, while professional potheads may be
able to move after an hour or two. The smells are OG
Kush earthy with subtle Purple Kush candy undertones.
Be careful not to over grind the dense buds because
they’ll break up into a fine powder and you’ll end up
with something that isn’t roll ready. Pink Kush is one of
my favorite Kushes.




                                                              P




                           153
                                Plain Ole Kush .
                               For people who are complaining about too much Kush –
                               yes, some professional potheads do actually complain
                               about too much of one kind of marijuana – Plain Ole
                               Kush is a slap to the stoner scenesters. This strain
P                              harkens back to the days when Kush meant Hindu Kush
                               or maybe Master Kush. However, Plain Ole Kush doesn’t
                               have a harsh cough and it especially doesn’t taste like
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               any of the California Kushes. Plain Ole Kush’s heavy in-
                               dica nugs produce an opulent, potent Master Kush-like
                               toke that lasts for hours. The stone is great for kicking
                               back and soaking in something visual. The fantastic pain
                               relieving properties are really fab and this is perfect pot
                               for not getting anything done. Don’t be trying to hump a
                               deadline while toking Plain Ole Kush because you’re not
                               going to complete your project.




                                                          154
 Purple D .
Anticipate an earthy, Kush stink that isn’t too overpower-
ing because Purple D is not the most potent-smelling
Kush. However, it packs a powerful punch to the face
when ripped in a bong. Purple D is kind of sneaky that
way; the smell is underwhelming, but the toke is an
overwhelming lung tickler. Plenty of professional pot-
heads will cough and get off because it’s a strong indica
with awesome downward vibes and body relaxing feel-
ings. Unwind both your mind and your body and you
may find yourself sliding out of your favorite chair. The
stone is very long lasting and plenty of potheads will
wake up the next day feeling refreshed. Purple D buds
are mildly ugly looking, but upon closer inspection
you’ll notice sparkling crystals. Don’t let this sly strain
fool you: it’s a powerful indica.




                                                              P




                           155
                                Purple Diamond .
                               Firm and crystal coated, Purple Diamond buds do in-
                               deed have a stoner sparkle to them. When the buds are
                               busted, this potent indica strain releases a fairly strong
                               stink. It’s not too overpowering, but it’s noticeable.
                               Strangely, the flavor is very mild and not aggressive at
                               all; somehow I thought it would be a taste bud ripper.
P                              Purple Diamond scores a real home run, however, in the
                               potency department. The smoke is hardy, heavy and,
                               most importantly, heavenly. Anticipate a sedate effect
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               coming on fast with even the most regular of tokers tak-
                               ing a nap if they’re not careful. It’s a real insomnia
                               solver! For those who can manage to keep their eyeballs
                               open, Purple Diamond is awesome movie watching
                               weed.




                                                          156
 Purple GOD.
The dark purple, almost black colors of Purple God
buds will drop your jaw and have you uttering, “Ganja
gawd damn!” The superb purple hues really give these
dense buds a majestic feel, but it’s difficult to describe     P
Purple God’s rather bland taste. The blasé flavor didn’t
live up to the nugs’ superb look. I just expected so much
more. However, PG has a deep, mellow, mind unwinding
stone and full body relaxing sensations that more than
make up for its lack of taste. Purple God is a fantastically
powerful indica, requiring just a little bit of it to really
put you on easy street. Ensure you turn the lights out im-
mediately after smoking a small joint because a weed
nap will be coming on strong. Only the hardiest will en-
dure to smoke another round. Purple God is best en-
joyed solo or with a partner immediately before bed.




                            157
                                Purple Kush .
                               Purple Kush will be one of the strains you’re going to
                               come across most frequently in your hunt. It’s a hugely
                               popular toke, but also one of the most mislabeled, so be
                               skeptical; plenty of unnamed nugs simply get labeled as
                               PK. Purple hues are not the only trait to look for; the flavor
                               is an earthy pine with a sweet purple candy aftertaste.
                               The candied sweetness mellows out an initially powerful
                               Kush zing, and you should be ready for the gorgeous can-
                               died aftertaste. PK buds will be incredibly compact,
                               chunky, solid and have a big stem. Nugs that have been
                               expertly grown will have purple flecks throughout. This
                               trait is accomplished by dropping grow room tempera-
                               ture in the final week of flowering. Purple Kush is a pure
                               indica with a downward, slack-jawed couch-lock effect.
                               People with pain problems will enjoy PK for its fantastic
                               pain relief. Best of all, it tastes great so it can be toked all
                               day and night without getting tired. Purple Kush slows
                               stoners down to a crawl.


P
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                                                             158
Q
 Quasar .
For many enthusiasts, Quasar’s wickedly rank fuel odor is
heavenly. However, not everyone is going to dig its almost
unnaturally foul stench: I know my mom didn’t appreciate
me grinding it up in her house. Its bitterness may turn
some off, but for others the severe Diesel odor is unique
                                                                Q
to the point where you might not want to stop inhaling
your jar. These are cream cannabis genetics with edgy
flavors that are vibrant and full of depth. The smoke is
rich, thick, and just a little of Quasar’s resinous nugs cre-
ates an impressive vapor fog. Quasar has an awesome
mellow vibe and a beautifully smooth stone. This weed is
fantastically relaxing; too much will have you snoozing,
but it’s serious maxing and relaxing marijuana.




                            161
R
 Red Dragon .
Another trippy couch-locker perfect for personal inner
journeys or social experiences, Red Dragon has a solid
Utopia Haze sativa side that turns it up while your ass
remains stuck. Your mind moves forward while you’re
sitting back grooving to your own ideas. Fascinatingly,
Red Dragon is really indica looking, which may throw
off tokers who are anticipating a heavy downward buzz.
The effects are long lasting and depending on your
personal THC tolerance level, could last from 30 min-     R
utes to 2 hours. Red Dragon has a similar stone to the
L.S.D. marijuana strain, but is even happier and more
uplifting. There’s a bit more get up and go to Red
Dragon than L.S.D., but they’re from the same seed
company, Barney’s Farm.




                          163
                                Rhazer .
                               Other than the bright red trichomes packed onto to
                               these hefty nugs, there’s very little about Rhazer that
                               showcases its sativa properties. The smell is somewhat
                               noticeable, but it’s been dulled by White Rhino to create
                               a fairly light aroma. Something about this strain causes
                               me to cough every time I exhale. Somewhere in the toke
                               lies a spicy zing that could be making Rhazer a lung
                               tickler. However, it’s difficult to distinguish because it in-
                               hales so smoothly. Rhazer has a mostly smooth soaring
                               effect. Enthusiasts who have problems with zippy weed
                               may find that Rhazer holds steady without becoming jit-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




R                              tery. This is great wake and bake bud for people with
                               pain problems or hardworking folks who need to get
                               through a rough morn-
                               ing or day. There’s
                               enough body buzz
                               to provide relief
                               without too much
                               of a couch-lock-
                               ing effect.




                                                            164
 Rhino Kush .
Unfortunately this wasn’t an overpowering smelling
bud. Instead, muted Kush aromas mingled with subtle
earthy tones. However, Rhino Kush’s stone and taste
make it worthwhile weed. Rhino Kush is a very smooth
smoke with a complex, lingering flavor of earthy Kush
undertones. The narcotic effect is full on the body, but
not the brain, creating a superb active mental state.
Rhino Kush relaxes your body, but not your mind. People        R
with a high THC tolerance won’t become useless, while
lightweights will enjoy a mellow but alert experience.
Rhino Kush contains plenty of resin-y goodness, which
makes for a sticky joint. Whether in a joint, bong or va-
porizer, just a little will go far, producing very desirable
effects. Dense buds glisten with crystals and tender red
trichome hairs protrude outward from within very com-
pact nugs. There are many more tender trichomes on
Rhino Kush than White Rhino or OG Kush, making it an
excellent combination of the two.

                            165
                                Rock Star .
                               This marijuana moniker is ganja glamorous, but de-
                               servedly so! Rock Star is delicate smelling with plenty of
                               bud plumpness and the soft, enjoyable, expensive scent
                               is very similar to Paradise Seeds’ Sensi Star; a wonder-
                               ful, weedy cinnamon smell. The buds look similar to
                               Sensi Star, but with even more nug density. Bonguru
                               Seeds, founded in 2002, created Rock Star from Sensi
                               Star and Rockbud from Soma Seeds, hence the name,
                               look and smell. Their result is a delicious downward but
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




R                              clear-headed stone. Though billed as an almost com-
                               plete indica you will think someone slipped in some
                               sativa as there’s a strong uplifting mental high happen-
                               ing: you’re locked in, but your mind is wandering. Great
                               for creative projects! Awesome for afternoon sessions or
                               for a night on the town as you won’t be drowsy. The
                               stone has plenty of depth to it, giving an expansive buzz
                               that continues long after your joint goes out.




                                                          166
 Russian Rocket Fuel .
This cute autoflowering strain has subdued New York
City Diesel petrol scents, which is good news for those
potheads who find the NYCD fuel flavor just too much to
bear. Russian Rocket Fuel doesn’t have that over the top
sour flavor because it’s been toned down by an un-
known indica and Lowryder. The soaring, happy, couch-         R
locking effect is great for a Monday morning wake and
bake or a smoke for those suffering from depression
that need a mental boost. The mild indica vibe smoothes
out an otherwise soaring sativa high and after an initial
jolt you settle into a steady orbit. Russian Rocket Fuel is
a great private head stash because it’s an autoflowering
strain that produces a decent personal supply. You’re ei-
ther going to have to grow it yourself or know someone
who does to find it. However, for people into autoflower-
ing strains, it’s well worth the investment.

                           169
S
 SAGE .
The exceedingly Haze-y spice and sandalwood incense
fragrance emitting from SAGE is truly amazing. The
smell leaps out at you as soon as the stash jar is opened
and the nugs smell so grand you might not want to grind
them up. The spicy smooth taste is a toker’s delight with
soft Afghani tones riding a wave of spiciness. Its well-
balanced buzz starts out with a sativa zip before settling
into a nice smooth indica ride. SAGE gives you great
height without leaving your chair. The towering men-
tal/creative couch-lock is deep rooted and ends on a
slow note. Designed to be the best of both weed types,
Sativa Afghani Genetic Equilibrium or SAGE accom-
plishes the task that its name sets down.

                                                             S




                           171
                                Sensi Star .
                               A bold burst of lemon scents, Sensi Star is especially
                               stinky for a predominantly indica plant. The rock solid
                               nugs give off an enjoyable sour stench. The smell isn’t a
                               fake sweet sour, but a truly surprising one. Sensi Star’s
                               lemon fresh flavor inhales very hard, even in a vapor-
                               izer; your face may contort and contract after exhaling
                               the lemon pine freshness. Be warned: this is a fantastic
                               sleepy time toke and only a little is required to truly feel
                               passive. New potheads may easily green out with good
                               Sensi Star, as it is extremely robust. The meditative high
                               massages your mind into an astonishing peacefulness.
                               This is great ganja, especially for eliminating stressful
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               days. Sensi Star shines brightly; it’s not my favorite, but it
                               does make me space-y. And who doesn’t like to space
S                              out once in a while?




                                                            172
                                shark shock.
                               A heady high with wonderful relaxation vibes, Shark
                               Shock is perfect for a lively afternoon session with
                               friends. There’s a slight perfume odor, but nothing to
                               write home about. The uplifting, social zip is influenced
                               by Skunk #1, while the steady, smooth, stress-free buzz
                               comes from White Widow; it starts out quick then slides
                               into a nice steady pace. The buzz is neither too slow nor
                               too quick – it is just right. On the inhale you’ll notice a
                               white strain spiciness and a harsh Skunky aftertaste that
                               remains long after your joint has gone out. Shark Shock
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               nugs have some heft to them; they are glittery, sticky
                               and create a rich, resinous and hardy toke. The gooey
S                              nugs gummed up my gear as well as the baggy that the
                               buds came in.




                                                          174
 Skunk # 1 .
With plenty of breeders offering their own version of
this venerable cannabis strain, there’s little to argue
about when it comes to anything labeled Skunk weed,
especially considering the stone can either be a sativa
or an indica depending on your source. Essentially, if it
stinks like a Skunk then it’s Skunk #1; a foul stinky strain
that hasn’t been around as much lately in North Amer-
ica, but used to be hugely popular. I’m talking more than
OG Kush popular! The indica is more of a rancid harsh
Skunk toke, while sativa Skunks have a more sickly
sweetness about them. The stone is just that: you are
stoned! Neither too euphoric nor too downward, the ef-
fects of this strain are pure textbook. Skunk #1 is one of
                                                               S
the first true cannabis hybrids, created by the Sacred
Seed Company by mixing a choice Afghani indica with
two stellar Mexican and Colombian sativas. As one of
the first true stable strains, Skunk has been bred into
many, many, different types of cannabis. Somewhere in
the lineage of many strain, there is a Skunk. Even to this
day when I smell a skunk I try to determine if it’s the
plant or animal.

                            175
                                Sour Cream .
                               DNA Genetics’ breeding team know that spicy and sour
                               go great together! Sour Cream combines a truly unique
                               Haze spiciness and a Sour Diesel metallic fuel tinge for
                               an utterly awe-inspiring toke. This sativa strain smells
                               absolutely amazing with its incredibly expensive floral
                               aroma. The substantial nugs are clustered with delicate
                               trichomes that produce a mellow uplifting zip. Sour
                               Cream is a very enjoyable, relaxing and mentally alert
                               high. Some sativas make me jittery when I toke too
                               much, but not Sour Cream, probably because there’s a
                               strong indica influence to keep me grounded. The strain
                               worked wonders on my fibromyalgia symptoms, proba-
                               bly because it’s a sativa leaning hybrid with enough in-
                               dica in it to manage pain problems. You should note that
                               Sour Cream, despite its name, is not a Cheese strain.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




S




                                                         176
 Sour Diesel          x   Purple Urkle .
The bittersweet Purple Urkle combined with an awe-
somely awful Sour Diesel sour taste creates a tasty pri-
vate head stash. Starts out with a strong and biting bitter
taste that then gives way to a sour-ish, but not petrol-
like, taste. Moderately dense buds break up beautifully,
releasing a wild, weedy odor. Ride your couch to the
moon with this powerful hybrid. This strain made sitting
in my office chair much more comfortable. Sour Diesel’s
uplifting mental clarity goes great with the body
buzzing and pain-relieving effects of Purple Urkle. Inter-
estingly, this strain ends on a high note, not a sleepy or
sedate one. Though you probably won’t be able to find
this exact cross, you can combine both into a joint for a
                                                              S
similar effect and taste.




                           177
                                Sour Diesel         x   Thai Tanic .
                               Although it didn’t have much of an expansive odor,
                               possessing just subtle hints of sour chocolate, Sour
                               Diesel x Thai Tanic is just delightful in the flavor de-
                               partment. It became expressive once inhaled, and the
                               bitter, dark chocolate-y smoke went down oh so
                               smooth. When it comes to taste you’re going to want to
                               inhale this strain all day, if you can find it! The buds
                               broke up beautifully with some stickiness and even a
                               small amount created yummy vapor bags. Expect a
                               clear-headed motivational zip. Unlike some sativa
                               strains with their anxious, paranoid vibe, this stash had
                               a wonderful steady ride. Instead of blasting off quickly,
                               it gently guns you upwards. Beware: it has strong
                               creeper qualities, allowing you to easily overestimate
                               how much to enjoy. Plenty of strains have Sour Diesel in
                               them, and you can see that it’s a great breeding plant
                               as evidenced by this unique creation.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




S




                                                         178
 Sour Tang .
The sour twinge to this toke is terrific, but Sour Tang is
not as acidic or metallic tasting as Sour Diesel. This
makes it much easier to inhale for people who want a
soaring sativa without the acquired, tangy taste of Sour
D. The zip isn’t a speedy, physical high, but a mental, up-
lifting zing, great for creative or social sessions because
your mind is engaged. You’ll become chatty or wordy, or
you might see things differently. It’s a munchies-induc-
ing strain and goes great with fruit because the flavors
mix exceedingly well. People who have appetite prob-
lems should really seek out Sour Tang. This strain makes
great morning marijuana because of its fruity aromas,
                                                              S
flavors and, most importantly, its get-up-and-go high.
Toking Sour Tang made me really want to greet the day
with a stoned, happy smile.




                           179
                                Spoetnik 1 .
                               Spoetnik 1 skyrockets with very soft and subtle hints of
                               grape-y flavors. The taste can easily be overlooked be-
                               cause it requires finer taste buds to figure it out. You’re
                               going to notice and remember Spoetnik’s aroma though;
                               she smells like expensive perfume, not like a cheap
                               date. Your nose will be overjoyed. Her aroma might have
                               oversold her taste, leaving it less considered than the
                               pleasant pot perfume. Spoetnik’s solid buds create a
                               clear-headed high, but it’s not a sativa. Unfortunately, the
                               great couch-locking properties aren’t long lasting and
                               like the rocket it’s named after, Spoetnik 1 has a quick
                               lift off, but it won’t take you to the moon.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




S




                                                           180
 Sweet Deep Grapefruit .
Sweet Deep Grapefruit by Spain’s Dinafem Seeds is in-
credibly balanced. From the flavor to the complex scent
to the deep stone, it’s an excellent hybrid. SDG is a bril-
liant blend of Blueberry sweetness and tangy Grape-
fruit, kind of like Pineapple, but not really. It’s not
aggressively acidic or berry flavored, but is somewhere
in between the two tastes. SDG buds are so gorgeously
coated with cannabis crystals that they’ll gum up your
weed works. They release a soft, fruity, expressive aroma
when busted, but generally don’t release much of a
scent. Nugs have phenomenal bag appeal and make
great nug porn. The Sweet Deep Grapefruit high flies
deep into the day, but be forewarned: the ending is a
crash. I became sleepy as the flight wore off and eventu-
ally had to take a nap.




                                                              S




                           183
                                Sweet Tooth .
                               The glorious candied indica taste from Sweet Tooth is
                               very charming. It’s a delicious dessert strain that is ex-
                               cellent for after dinner party sessions, but only if you
                               want a chill and relaxed mood. Sweet Tooth’s light, fluffy,
                               bright green nugs and pink trichomes create a slow-
                               you-down mode, but it shouldn’t be too sedate for pro-
                               fessional potheads. I was rocking out, throwing two
                               finger devil horns and generally enjoying the aggres-
                               sive hard rock stone to Black
                               Sabbath’s I and Tool’s The
                               Pot – all while stuck to my
                               chair. Sweet Tooth’s de-
                               lightful flavor and re-
                               laxed buzz is good
                               to the very last
                               vapor bag. A highly
                               enjoyable strain that
                               brings back memories of
                               a time before Kush.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




S




                                                          184
 Syrup .
You have to love a toke you can almost chew! Syrup has
a classic old school ‘70s Northern Lights taste. It’s an op-
portunity to experience marijuana like your parents or
grandparents did when they first inhaled. You will cough
and get off! Syrup buds may look a little rough, espe-
cially if not given proper attention during the trim, but
they’re very weighty. When smoking a joint of Syrup an-
ticipate it becoming a sticky, resinous mess to the point
where joints release a gooey resin that just pours onto
your hand like syrup being applied to pancakes. It’s an
                                                               S
excellent personal stash strain, but unfortunately only
people who grow Syrup will experience it because it’s
an autoflower.




                            185
T
 Thai Tanic .
A great play on words! Unlike its namesake, Thai Tanic
will have you soaring rather than sinking. The Flying
Dutchmen have developed a sativa with a fantastic flight
time, yet for a sativa it doesn’t have a strong noticeable
smell at first. After a good sniff, however, you’ll be able
to detect hints of coffee and chocolate-y ganja good-
ness. Prepare for a zippy motivational “get on up and
go” vibe that will have you bouncing around your ses-
sion space. This strain also has some mild trippy ele-
ments, so people who are used to downward
couch-locking Kush strains will find Thai Tanic to be
powerful pot. The Flying Dutchmen breeders have taken
a long flowering landrace Thai plant and combined it          T
with Skunk #1, with the goal of retaining the Thai’s fla-
vors and high while shortening the plant’s height and
flowering time, and the Skunk #1 fattens out what would
otherwise be wispy nugs. Tokers inhaling since the days
of the legendary ‘70s Thai stick may get fond memories
of marijuana from their youth. Other potheads will get a
small but potent glimpse into pot’s past.

                           187
                                The Hog .
                               Bred for stoned potency and heavy yields, The Hog’s
                               smell and taste is thankfully not barnyard, but it is very
                               bland. The taste is very boring, which was acceptable in
                               2002 when TH Seeds first released The Hog but unfortu-
                               nately, it doesn’t really fly these days. Given the flavorful
                               indicas available, it may come up short for finicky pot-
                               heads who want the whole weedy package. The buds
                               are going to be chunky with excellent bag appeal, and
                               they’ll potentially make a plop sound when dropped on
                               your dealer’s scale because they are so heavy. Even
                               smallish nugs have an impressive girth to them. Just a lit-
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               tle creates an impressive session of hard-to-focus, slack
                               jaw drooling. This strain is not good for social functions,
                               unless you want a room full of stoners incapable of con-
T                              versation.




                                                           188
                                The Purps .
                               These simply sensational pieces of purple bud sparkled
                               and twinkled in my Volcano vaporizer canister. I was re-
                               ally impressed with the deep purple hues of these
                               hunky buds. The Purps reigns stoner supreme in the
                               highly competitive “gorgeous purple-hued marijuana”
                               category. Enthusiasts are extra harsh on purple strains,
                               often overlooking their impressive Kush flavors. The
                               Purps has a tight taste with sweet Kush hints, and my
                               toker taste buds had memories of Purple Kush. The
                               Purps is a sedate knock out, a pain reliever and excel-
                               lent grass to unwind with. The long lasting effects range
                               from waking up in a few hours to sleeping right through
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               to the next day, depending on tolerance. Plenty of ston-
                               ers seek out The Purps as their must-have strain. It is
                               bucket list bud.
T




                                                         190
 The Real HP .
This strain doesn’t look or smell like it’s going to be
good, but The Real HP is packed with delightfully
smooth Afghani hashish flavors. These bitter hash tones
have an extremely heavy bite to them. The Real HP is
deceiving in its looks, and produces a mellow, creeping
vibe. The relaxing stone is great for unwinding both
your mind and body and you can anticipate layers of
stress and tension melting away after every inhale. After
a joint, you may discover hours have passed when you
thought it was just a few minutes. Hash Plant strains, like
this one, used to be very popular before Kush took over.
Old school stoners will really twig to this dramatic tast-
ing toke, but sadly it has become scarce as more grow-
ers move on to Kush strains. Stoners seeking a taste of
Afghanistan without getting imported hash containing
camel dung need to discover The Real HP.




                                                              T




                           191
 Trainwreck .
The slick running Trainwreck will get you off your rails
with its soaring zing of a high. Unlike most sativas with
their out-of-the-gate zeal, Trainwreck starts slow, chug-
ging up to full speed. Prepare for Trainwreck’s creeper
toke because if it catches you by surprise, you’ll miss
your stop and many more thereafter. The chatty, creative
zip gives way to a nice relaxing chill. Trainwreck has a
quiet, lemony smooth, spicy flavor and its buds are im-
pressively solid, leaning more towards their Afghani in-
dica heritage than sativa Thai. Delicate red trichomes are
protected by hefty ganja girth. I was surprised at how
many vapor bags Trainwreck actually created. Personally
I prefer K-Train with its more lively tastes and highs over
Trainwreck’s firm flavor and bright grounded buzz.

                                                              T




                           193
                                Tropicanna .
                               An exotic tropical taste with every toke, Tropicanna will
                               slow you down substantially. You’re not going to get much
                               done if you toke a doobie of this before attacking your
                               to-do list; it took me plenty of time to finish writing its
                               entry as my mind wandered and I sat there slack jawed.
                               The big buds had substantial girth and plenty of fantastic
                               red trichomes. Just a little will create numerous vapor
                               bags and an incredible effect. Tropicanna has a complex,
                               hot and dry aroma as well as an original, crisp and
                               smooth taste. It goes down nicely, like a tropical drink.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




T




                                                          194
U
                                UK Cheese .
                               There’s an absurd amount of bag appeal to these buds.
                               They’re absolutely gorgeous to gaze upon and even bet-
                               ter in a bong. Exhaling UK Cheese’s heavy dank flavors
                               may cause a serious coughing fit: your lungs are ex-
                               panding while your taste buds try to recover from an
                               acidic assault. UK Cheese was chosen particularly for its
                               musky, harsh, cheesy taste that causes tears from just
                               about everyone who encounters it. It has a memorably
                               pungent and gutsy aroma, but unlike Exodus Cheese
                               with its mountain goat taste, UK Cheese has a more re-
                               fined zest. It’s an indica dominant strain that produces an
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               impressive downward dull thud. I absolutely love it in
                               my Volcano vaporizer! People with chronic pain prob-
                               lems may find UK Cheese’s persistent effects to be the
                               medicinal pot they need to solve their woes.
U




                                                          196
 Ultimate indica .
The first thing you’re going to notice about Ultimate In-
dica is its mellow, slow-you-down stone because it has
very little to no noticeable smell. Worst, it looks like your
standard run of the mill indica with its tight compact
buds that do little to distinguish themselves. However,
looks and smell are very deceiving because the buzz is
where the legendary name wallops the cannabis com-
petition. Ultimate Indica cranks it past sedate and onto
bedtime and too much of this hardy, heavy stone will
have you waking up hours later fully rested. Many of my
writing sessions have ended because the indica buzz is
so creatively negative, but my weedy words stopped
flowing completely for hours after a Volcano vaporizer
canister. Overlook the concentrated dull flavors that are
very smooth because LUI sedate vibe is legendary.
                                                                U




                            197
                                Ultra Kush .
                               These dense buds have a strong, sickly sweet dank that
                               rides on top of an earthy bed of Kush aromas. While tok-
                               ing Ultra Kush you discover that it’s a fantastic and origi-
                               nal combination of Skunk and Kush flavors that are very
                               noticeable. Anticipate some cough on your exhale be-
                               cause it’s a very lung expanding strain. It continues to
                               tickle your lungs long after exhaling. Ultra Kush earns an
                               ‘if you don’t cough, you don’t get off’ badge. This Kush
                               had me hacking up a lung then slammed me with a de-
                               motivating, sedate stone. Awesome for bedtime bong
                               rips! After toking, the only task you might be able to ac-
                               complish is choosing which movie to watch, though I’d
                               recommend doing that before your session. My chronic
                               pain problems are greatly reduced for a while after in-
                               haling Ultra Kush and a joint should happily get most
                               people through a movie.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




U




                                                           198
 Ultra Skunk .
The ultimate classic cannabis stink is Skunk. Pungent,
foul and difficult to disguise, Skunk marijuana was
everywhere back in the days before Kush. Yes, it does
smell like a skunk has crossed your path. Ultra Skunk is
an effort to create the ultimate Skunk strain. The results
are a toke that is softer, easier and less complex than
Skunk #1 – in fact, it’s almost too smooth. Ultra Skunk has
less lung expanding coughing fits than traditional
Skunk, which is something I look for in a Skunk strain,
along with a great stink! Anticipate a stellar flight with
plenty of up time and a great creative spring in your
step. There was a time when if you smelled Skunk you
didn’t know if it was the animal or the plant.
                                                              U




                           199
V
 Vanilla Kush .
With every inhale a super smooth, vanilla-tinged Kush
yumminess explodes in your mouth. Vanilla Kush’s
charming flavor creates delicious doobies that pack a
powerful, potent and sluggish stone. A small amount cre-
ates a chill, relaxing vibe that Barney’s Farm lists at an
outlandish 22 percent THC. It’s no boast; it’s believable!
Regular size Vanilla Kush joints devastate me and for so-
cial occasions mix well with sativa strains to create a
chilled but talkative room. The full body aroma of laven-
der and vanilla should really impress bud babes. You’re
not going to have to take deep whiffs to determine if it is
truly Vanilla Kush because the smell jumps out of the
container the moment it’s opened. When busted, the
buds release an aggressive Kush stench. With its amaz-
ing aromas, flavors and stone, Vanilla Kush should really
appeal to Kush aficionados, as it’s unique enough to dis-
tinguish itself from the cluttered field of Kushes.
                                                              V



                           201
                                Viper .
                               A pungent earthy
                               stink, Viper has loud
                               bold flavors that sting
                               your taste buds into
                               stoner submission. The tip of
                               your tongue and roof of your
                               mouth just get hammered by Viper’s
                               Kush-like, Cheese-y venom. Best of all is the
                               fact that Viper’s flavor doesn’t die off: it’s good to the last
                               vapor bag and the end of every joint. The stone is a clear-
                               headed indica high, making it perfect for computer work,
                               gaming or other sitting activities that still require mental
                               alertness. Viper has amazing body relaxing qualities and
                               worked wonderfully at reducing my fibromyalgia symp-
                               toms. It’s great for afternoon sessions and is perfect pot for
                               socializing. Buds have a heft to them, are rough looking
                               and are packed with trichomes. Not for the faint at heart or
                               potheads with weak
                               sensibilities.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




V



                                                            202
W
 Wappa .
Another classic-smelling cannabis strain, Wappa has a
traditional Amsterdam dank about it. Professional pot-
heads who haven’t experienced Wappa before should
be able to distinguish it clearly as pot straight from Ams-
terdam because it has that unmistakable ‘dam stink. The
strong body buzz doesn’t prevent people from getting
tasks done, but there’s an insightful introspective high
going on too, which is a common trait in Amsterdam
cannabis. Wappa is great outdoor toking weed because
you can sit in a park or go for a hike, blaze a joint, then
just peacefully chill. You have to find the perfect spot in
advance, though, because the chill body buzz will have
you lying in the grass for hours. Wappa’s not really a so-
cial talkative stone, but for intimate sessions it’s a solid
cannabis choice.




                                                               W


                            205
                                Watermelon .
                               Lovers of fruity strains
                               rejoice! Watermelon
                               does indeed smell
                               and taste like a slice of
                               melon. However, it’s not
                               like an actual piece of fruit – more like a candied fla-
                               vored fruit, making it super yummy! The nugs give off a
                               great ganja stink and many enthusiasts will be able to
                               recognize its fruity ganja goodness from Watermelon’s
                               aroma alone. This strain is a great summertime toke with
                               a motivational get outside moderate body buzz. It pro-
                               vides plenty of pain relief without interfering with tasks.
                               Enthusiasts will dig smoking a doobie and then going
                               about their day with a nice heady high. I was really im-
                               pressed with the number of vapor bags Watermelon
                               produced. It’s a spectacular strain and weedy welcome
                               addition to the growing number of fruity strains. Soon
                               enthusiasts may regard it as wonderful as Grapefruit or
                               even the legendary Blueberry.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




W


                                                          206
 White Bubblegum .
The fantastic floral tones of white marijuana are beauti-
fully combined with sweet bubblegum flavors to create
a wholly unique taste in this strain. White Bubblegum
nugs are gorgeous and exceedingly compact, but
they’re heavy to the point of impressiveness. The aromas
just jump after the buds are chopped and I learned that
just a little White Bubblegum produces a potent, candy-
tasting vapor bag or joint. Of course, it goes great in a
clean and iced bong, too! The indica stone is mostly
downward, body and mind relaxing in the slide-out-of-
your-chair-drooling kind of way. Be prepared, because
White Bubblegum blows your pot panties off and you
may wake up from a wonderful weedy nap hours later.
Passing out in a chair or couch is a strong possibility
after a session with this great strain.


                                                            W


                          207
                                White Dwarf .
                               A unique, delicious and tasty toke that is unfortunately
                               difficult to discover, White Dwarf is an autoflowering
                               strain that produces a personal stash ensuring that you
                               either have to grow your own or know the person who
                               did. White Dwarf has a spicy flavor and an attractive per-
                               fume. It’s very spicy and once ground, you’re really
                               going to notice its powerful aromatic properties that are
                               extremely similar to White Widow. Fans of White Widow
                               may have a soft spot for this small plant. The high is not
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               ideal for a wake and bake, but is excellent for after work
                               or prime time puffing. It will slow you down to the point
                               where too much may have you tapping out and napping.
                               A sleep-solving indica, White Dwarf has buds rich with
                               white frosting and packing fantastic toking properties.



W


                                                          208
 White Rhino .
White Rhino’s heavy buds release an earthy stink with
hints of White Widow’s wonderful uniqueness that makes
me tingle. The aromas and heavy tastes are greatly
muted compared to WW so you won’t confuse the two!
White Rhino buds are heavier, compact and tougher ap-
pearing (because it’s more indica dominant) than other
White strains. White Rhino was created from a pedigree
of excellent genetics and is a perfect complement to its
mom. It has more sedate properties than White Widow
and fantastic couch-locking qualities. White Rhino is
mildly narcotic, making it great for evening sessions. If
you’re toking in the afternoon be prepared to go down
for the cannabis count, because that’s what I had to do.
White Rhino puts your brain in a mentally sluggish state.




                                                            W


                          209
                                White Russian .
                               White Russian is a gorgeous, sweet and floral smelling
                               strain that packs a potent, soaring sativa, stress-relieving
                               stone. Having been around for some time, White Russ-
                               ian’s aroma is best described now as classic Amster-
                               dam. It is dank like all great ganja and the harsh, heavy
                               and resinous taste is going to really excite professional
                               potheads. White Russian leans more towards AK-47 than
                               spicy White Widow. The nugs are weighed down with an
                               incredible amount of crystal development that results in
                               a beautiful, euphoric high. It’s wonderful weed to come
                               home to after a long day at your job because its high is
                               so relaxing but not dulling. White Russian’s uplifting
                               buzz complements plenty of active and outgoing activi-
                               ties. I’m a huge fan of White marijuana strains to treat my
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               fibromyalgia symptoms and White Russian is possibly
                               one of the best at managing my illness.




W


                                                           210
                                White Widow .
                               A true cannabis champion, White Widow’s lively spici-
                               ness has garnered a legendary reputation. The aroma is
                               close to peppery and will prickle a well-trained toker’s
                               nose. Best of all, White Widow’s voluptuous, unique smell
                               exactly matches its flavor. Anticipate a black pepper
                               and cinnamon explosion with every inhale and a pleas-
                               ant body-relaxing buzz. However, there’s no dullness. In-
                               stead, White Widow has an alert, active quality, making it
                               wonderful for intense mental activity. You’re going to be
                               chilled and relaxed, but focused. This is excellent pot for
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               social functions. White Widow is the mother of a long lin-
                               eage of White marijuana strains and it continues to be a
                               staple on many Dutch coffeeshop menus. A whole sub
                               category of cannabis is dedicated to White strains and
                               they’re my favorites; White Widow, White Rhino, and
                               Great White Shark. I’m always on the hunt for great
                               White strains.
W


                                                          212
                                Willy Jack .
                               Anticipate a surprisingly soft but zealous toke from Willy
                               Jack. This is an indica to write a blog about as it has a
                               taste very similar to Williams Wonder with some won-
                               derful bits of Jack Herer marijuana spiciness thrown in.
                               Willy Jack is an easy-to-inhale strain; possibly too easy,
                               because it expands in your lungs something fierce. It
                               goes down smooth then hits hard like a hockey body
                               check or a French Canadian accent. It’s mind-wandering
                               weed; you’re daydream tripping, getting easily dis-
                               tracted, but not really going anywhere. No tasks are get-
                               ting done. Strangely complex like poutine, but rest
                               assured: this is willy, willy good weed.
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




W


                                                          214
Y
                                Yoda .
                               These Orange Diesel x OG Kush seeds were gifted by
                               an online friend who goes by the screen name Yoda. Out
                               of my five beans I was only able to score one female, but
                               it was a fantastic, fun, sturdy female to grow, and it ulti-
                               mately turned heads when toked. The strong Kush
                               scents stank up big rooms and potheads immediately
                               noticed when a jar of Yoda was opened. Professional
                               potheads will notice an underlining Orange Diesel
                               aroma, and, when inhaled, this scent becomes a delight-
                               fully strong, acidic aftertaste that lit up my senses some-
                               thing superb. Yoda is a sativa-leaning strain that has a
                               mentally active high with couch-locking pain relieving
Marijuana Smoker’s Guidebook




                               properties. Sadly, not knowing what to expect and not
                               having space to keep mother plants I did this strain as a
                               one off and really regret it because Yoda is otherworldly.
                               After a session you truly are filled with the force.




Y

                                                           216
Additional Photo Credits
ChemDawg © Humboldt Seed Organisation humboldtseeds.co.uk
Chronic Ryder © David Strange jointdoctordirect.com
Deep Purple © Subcool and Team Green Avengers tgagenetics.com
Grapefruit © Female Seeds femaleseeds.nl
Green Crack © SinSemillaWorks! facebook.com/SinsemillaWorks
Headband © S.T. Oner greencandypress.com
Ice Cream © Paradise Seeds paradise-seeds.com
Ice Kush by Advanced Seeds © South Bay Ray advancedseeds.com
Island Sweet Skunk © Next Generation Seed Co. greenlifeseeds.com
Jack Herer © Sensi Seeds sensiseeds.com
Juicy Fruit © Andre Grossman trichometechnologies.com
LA Confidential by DNA Genetics © 420 Clones 420clones.com
Master Kush © White Label Seeds whitelabelseeds.com
Quasar © Buddah Seeds buddhaseedbank.com
Rock Star © Bong Guru Beans bongguruseeds.com
Russian Rocket Fuel © Short Stuff Seeds shortstuffseeds.com
Sensi Star © Paradise Seeds paradise-seeds.com
Spoetnik #1 © Paradise Seeds paradise-seeds.com
Sweet Deep Grapefruit © Dinafem Seeds dinafem.org
The Hog © TH Seeds thseeds.com
Trainwreck © Green House Seed Co. greenhouseseeds.nl
Wappa © Paradise Seeds paradise-seeds.nl
White Russian © Low Life Seeds seedsman.com
White Widow © Dinafem dinafem.org




                              217
