American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 
Roy Upton RH 
Revision 2014
  

Authors 
Botanical Identification 
Mahmoud ElSohly PhD  Suman Chandra PhD 
Hemant Lata PhD 
University of Mississippi 
University, MS 
Macroscopic Identification Suman Chandra PhD 
Hemant Lata PhD  
Mahmoud ElSohly PhD 
University of Mississippi 
University, MS 
Microscopic Identification Suman Chandra PhD 
Hemant Lata PhD  
Mahmoud ElSohly PhD 
University of Mississippi 
University, MS 
Elizabeth Williamson PhD University of Reading 
Reading, UK 
Commercial Sources and  Handling 
Suman Chandra PhD  
Hemant Lata PhD 
University of Mississippi 
University, MS 
Roy Upton RH  
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia Scotts Valley, CA 
Daniel Harder PhD 
Museum of Natural History Santa Cruz, CA 
Constituents 
Mahmoud ElSohly PhD  Desmond Slade PhD 
University of Mississippi 
School of Pharmacy 
University, MS 
Analytical 
Thin-Layer Chromatography (TLC) Gas Chromatography (GC) Mahmoud ElSohly PhD  
Desmond Slade PhD 
Zlatra Mehmedic PhD 
Mohammed M Radwan PhD University of Mississippi 
University, MS 
High Performance Liquid  
Chromatography (HPLC) 
Kong M Li PhD 
University of Sydney 
Sydney, NSW 
Reviewers 
Wendy Appplequist PhD 
Missouri Botanical Garden St. Louis, MO 
Paula Brown PhD 
British Columbia Institute of  Technology (BCIT) 
British Columbia, Canada 
Rudolf Brenneisen 
University of Bern 
Bern, Switzerland 
Mike Corral 
Wo/Men’s Alliance for Medical  Marijuana 
Santa Cruz, CA 
Staci Eisner 
Cannabis Committee 
American Herbal Products  Association 
Silver Spring, MD 
Franjo Grotenhermen MD International Association for  Cannabinoid Medicines (IACM) Ruethen, Germany 
Erik W Johansen 
Special Pesticide Registration  Program Coordinator 
Washington State Department of  Agriculture 
Olympia, WA 
James Kababick 
Flora Research Laboratories Grants Pass, OR 
ao Prof Dr Liselotte Kren 
University of Vienna 
Vienna, Austria 
Prof Dr Reinhard Länger 
AGES Pharm Med 
Vienna, Austria 
Etienne de Meijer 
GW Pharmaceuticals 
Salisbury, UK 
David Potter PhD 
GW Pharmaceuticals 
Salisbury, UK 
Eike Reich PhD 
CAMAG 
Muttenz, Switzerland 
Jeanette Roberts PhD MPH University of Wisconsin 
Madison, WI 
Steph Sherer 
Americans for Safe Access (ASA) Washington, DC 
Bill Schoenbart LAc DAOM Five Branches University 
Santa Cruz, CA 
Amala Soumyanath PhD 
Oregon Health and Science  University 
Portland, OR 
Elan Sudberg 
Costa Mesa, CA 
Elizabeth Williamson PhD 
University of Reading 
Reading, UK 
Hugh Watson 
Marijuana Agricultural Chemical  Specialist 
Washington State Liquor Control  Board 
Olympia, WA 
Final Reviewers 
Giovanni Appendino Laurea Department of Pharmaceutical  Sciences 
University of the Eastern Piedmont Novara, Italy 
Vincenzo Di Marzo PhD 
Endocannabinoid Research Group Institute of Biomolecular Chemistry Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Pozzuoli (NA), Italy 
John McPartland DO MS 
Middlebury, VT 
Raphael Mechoulam PhD 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem Jerusalem, Israel 
Jonathan Page PhD 
National Research Council Saskatoon, Canada 
Ethan Russo MD 
GW Pharmaceuticals 
Salisbury, UK 
Maged Sharaf PhD 
American Herbal Products  Association 
Silver Spring, MD 
Michael Steenhout 
Washington State Liquor Control  Board 
Olympia, WA
ISBN: 1-929425-37-6 ISSN: 1538-0297  © 2014 American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® PO Box 66809, Scotts Valley, CA 95067 USA 
All rights reserved. No part of this monograph  may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,  or transmitted in any form or by any means with out written permission of the American Herbal  Pharmacopoeia®. 
The American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® is a  nonprofit corporation 501(c)(3). To purchase  monographs or botanical and chemical refer ence standards, contact the American Herbal  Pharmacopoeia® • PO Box 66809 • Scotts Valley,  CA 95067 • USA • (831) 461-6318 or visit the AHP  website at www.herbal-ahp.org. 
Medical Disclaimer 
The information contained in this monograph  represents a synthesis of the authoritative scien tific and traditional data. All efforts have been  made to ensure the accuracy of the information  and findings presented. Those seeking to utilize  botanicals as part of a health care program should  do so under the guidance of a qualified health care  professional. 
Statement of Nonendorsement 
Reporting on the use of proprietary products  reflects studies conducted with them and is not  meant to be a product endorsement. 
Design & Layout 
Michael Parisi 
Aptos, CA 
Cover Photograph 
Cannabis cultivated under the Compassionate  Investigational New Drug program at the University  of Mississippi administered by the National  Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). Photograph  courtesy of: University of Mississippi. 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014  
Ta b l e o f C o n t e n t s 
Nomenclature 2 Botanical Nomenclature 
Botanical Family 
Pharmaceutical Nomenclature 
Pharmacopoeial Definition 
Common Names 
Identification 2 Botanical Identification 
Macroscopic Identification 
Organoleptic Characterization 
Microscopic Identification 
Commercial Sources and Handling 18 Sourcing 
Cultivation 
Harvest 
Drying 
Packaging 
Storage 
Natural Contaminants and Adulterants Qualitative Differentiation 
Sustainability and Environmental Impact Documentation of Supply 
Growing and Harvesting Guidelines 
Security 
Suppliers and Dispensaries 
Constituents 33 
Analytical 41 Thin-Layer Chromatography (TLC) 
High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) Gas Chromatography with Flame Ionization  Detection (GC-FID) 
Limit Tests 
Foreign Organic Matter 
Total Ash 
Acid-insoluble Ash 
Loss on Drying 
Pesticide Limits 
Microbial and Fungal Limits 
Metal Limits 
Solvent Residues 
International Status 53 References 57  
Legal Notification 
The following Standards of Identity, Analysis, and Quality Control of Cannabis are intended to provide scientifi cally valid methods for the analysis of cannabis and its preparations that can be used to comply with state and  federal regulations and policies. The analytical methods were obtained from peer reviewed literature, have been  used as part of international or federal monitoring programs for cannabis, and have been verified for their scientific  validity. Methods other than those presented in this monograph may be scientifically valid and provide reliable  results. However, all methods must be verified as being scientifically valid prior to use for regulatory compliance. 
In the United States, cannabis is a Schedule I controlled substance under federal law; therefore, any use or  possession of cannabis and its preparations is illegal except pursuant to the compassionate use Investigational New  Drug exemption. These standards are not intended to support, encourage, or promote the illegal cultivation, use,  trade, or commerce of cannabis. Individuals, entities, and institutions intending to possess or utilize cannabis and  its preparations should consult with legal counsel prior to engaging in any such activity. 
The citing of any commercial names or products does not and should not be construed as constituting an  endorsement by the American Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Additionally, the reliability, and therefore ability to comply  with state or federal regulations, of any conclusions drawn from the analysis of a sample is dependent upon the test  sample accurately representing the entire batch. Therefore, when performing all analytical tests, a formal sampling  program must be employed.
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 1 
N o m e n c l a t u r e 
Botanical Nomenclature 
Cannabis L. (includes Cannabis sativa, C. indica) 
Botanical Family 
Cannabaceae 
Pharmacopoeial Nomenclature 
Cannabis Inflorescentia 
Pharmacopoeial Definition 
Cannabis consists of the dried inflorescences and remains  of subtending leaves of pistillate Cannabis species plants. 
Common Names 
Cannabis, ganja, grass, hemp, marijuana (alternatively  spelled marihuana), pot, weed, sinsemilla. 
I d e n t i f i c a t i o n 
Botanical Identification 
Taxonomic Discussion 
The taxonomic classification of Cannabis has been the  subject of considerable debate in scientific and legal forums  for decades and is driven by classical botanical taxonomy,  chemotaxonomy, and molecular sequencing. Opinions  regarding Cannabis have been split between polytypic  (multiple-species) and monotypic (single-species) views of  the genus. Both views usually segregate plant populations  by their relative concentrations of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol  (Δ9-THC; hereafter referred to as THC) and cannabidiol  (CBD). For a detailed account of the taxonomic history of  Cannabis see Hillig (2005), Russo (2004), Schultes et al.  (1974), and Small and Cronquist (1976). 
Following the formal description of C. sativa by  Linnaeus in 1753, Lamarck (1785) published a description  of what he considered a different species, C. indica, based  on plant specimens collected in Asia. The C. indica plants  were relatively shorter, had smaller leaves, narrower leaflets,  smaller fruit, and, as described by Lamarck, poorer fiber  quality than C. sativa, but greater utility as an inebriant.  Since then, the name C. indica has been applied to variants  with high levels of psychoactive THC, while the name C.  sativa has generally been applied to plants selected for their  yield of bast (phloem) fibers in the stem and relatively high  CBD to THC ratio. Wild-type plants growing in southeast  Europe, possibly descending from the ancestor of C. sativa,  were named C. sativa. var. spontanea Vav. and C. ruderalis  Janisch. Vavilov encountered unique, broad-leafleted plants  in Afghanistan. After some equivocation, he named them C.  indica var. kafiristanica (a wild-type plant) and C. indica var.  afghanica (plants with traits of domestication). Numerous  other botanical names have appeared in the literature (e.g., 
see Schultes et al. 1974 for discussion and Tropicos.org for a  nearly complete list). 
Schultes et al. (1974) and Anderson (1980) recognized  3 entities: Cannabis sativa L. (tall, branched plants, used  mainly for fiber and seed and also for drugs), C. indica  Lam. (short, densely branched plants with firm stem, broad  leaflets, and high content of psychoactive THC), and  C. ruderalis Janisch. (short, often unbranched “roadside”  plants usually yielding a high CBD to THC ratio). The  taxonomic treatments by Schultes and Anderson departed  from the concepts of Linneaeus, Lamarck, and Janischevsky:  These authors treat C. sativa as a source of psychoactive  drugs; Lamarck’s C. indica designates plants from India,  which are relatively tall, laxly branched, with narrow  leaflets; they apply C. ruderalis to plants from Central Asia,  whose morphology departs from Janischevsky’s description  of European plants with moderate height, strong branching,  and long, narrow leaves. 
Small and Cronquist (1976) analyzed 350 world-wide  accessions in a common garden experiment. These authors  argued that due to the absence of reproductive barriers  and the morphological discontinuities of the plant, only  one polymorphic species, C. sativa, currently exists. They  further suggested that the current gene pool of Cannabis 
was heavily influenced by human agronomic selection and  proposed the recognition of subspecies sativa (low content  of THC, grown primarily for fiber and seed use) and indica  (high content of THC, grown primarily for intoxicant use)  within the single species, C. sativa.  
Conversly, Hillig argues that the split between sativa  and indica may have pre-dated human intervention. He  analyzed 157 accessions of known geographic origin in a  common garden experiment, using genetic evidence (Hillig  2005), cannabinoid profiles (Hillig and Mahlberg 2004),  terpenoid variation (Hillig 2004), and host-parasite data  (McPartland and Hillig 2006). He recognized a sativa gene  pool included hemp fiber and seed landraces from Europe  and Central Asia and Eastern European ruderal (roadside)  accessions. The indica gene pool comprised narrow-leaflet  drug strains from Southern Asia, Africa, and South America,  wide-leaflet drug strains from Afghanistan and Pakistan, Far  Eastern fiber and seed landraces, and feral populations from  Nepal and India. A putative third gene pool was formed by  ruderal accessions from Central Asia. This classification and  nomenclature was adopted and expanded by Clarke and  Merlin (2013). 
A vernacular taxonomy of “Sativa” and “Indica” has  arisen, which conflicts with the formal botanical taxonomy  of Linneaus and Lamarck, as noted by Small (2007). The 2  names have been commonly used to refer to, narrow- and  wide-leafleted drug varieties, respectively (Hillig 2004).  However, due to the widespread interbreeding of the  species, the application of these terms to narrow and broad  leafleted specimens is botanically imprecise. Recent floristic  treatments of Cannabis recognize only one (C. sativa) or,  rarely, 3 species, noting the confused state of taxonomic  understanding: Flora of China and Flora of the USSR lists 2  
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 2 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
  
Figure 1 Morphological characteristics of Cannabis 
A. Inflorescence of male (staminate) plant. B. Fruiting female (pistillate). 
a. Staminate flower. 
b. Stamen (anther and short filament). 
c. Stamen. 
d. Pollen grains. 
e. Pistillate flower with bract. 
Source: Köhler, Medizinal-Pflanzen in naturgetreuen  Abbildungen und kurz erläuterndem Texte (1887). 
f. Pistillate flower without bract. 
g. Pistillate flower showing ovary (longitudinal section). h. Seed (achene) with bract. 
i. Seed without bract. 
j. Seed (side view). 
k. Seed (cross section). 
l. Seed (longitudinal section). 
m. Seed without pericarp (peeled).
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 3 
  
  

2a. 
2b. 
  
  
2c. 2d.
Figure 2 Botanical characteristics of cannabis inflorescences 
2a. Full view of mature high-THC-producing female (pistillate) plant. 
2b. Full view of mature high-CBD-producing female (pistillate) plant. 
2c. Long dense raceme of a high THC-producing female plant bearing pistillate (female) flowers. 
2d. Inflorescence of a high CBD-producing (CBD:THC ratio 30:1) female plant (note long slender leaves). 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 4 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
  
  

  

2f. 
  

2g. 
2e. 
2h. 
Figure 2 (continued) Botanical characteristics of cannabis inflorescences 
2e. Maturing female inflorescence showing young yellow styles and stigmas (often referred to as “pistils”). 2f. Close-up of maturing female inflorescence showing young yellow styles and stigmas senescing brown and shriveling and an  abundance of glandular trichomes. 
2g. Female inflorescence with senesced reddish-brown styles and stigmas, an indicator of inflorescence maturity. 2h. Close-up of female inflorescence with senesced reddish-brown styles and stigmas.
(C. sativa L. and C. ruderalis Janisch.), Flora of Pakistan lists  one, Flora of Missouri lists one, Flora of North America lists  one, and Flora of Taiwan Checklist lists one. 
Extensive co-cultivation and crossbreeding practices  have effectively crossed the boundaries between the various  taxonomic categories within Cannabis. Although outside  of the strictly botanical classification, nomenclature of  cultivated plants, governed by the International Code  of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants (Brickell et al.  2009), may be more applicable to further differentiation of  Cannabis plants cultivated today. Such nomenclature is not  taxonomic, but cultonomic, and recognizes cultivars and  
groups based on economically important characteristics,  without an appeal to the phylogenetic hierarchy. With this  approach, Cannabis plants that satisfy selected criteria might  be assigned to any number of groups, depending on the  use emphasized, e.g., THC-drug group, CBD-drug group,  mixed THC-CBD-drug group, fiber-hemp group, seed-oil  group, etc. 
Cannabis is a member of the Cannabaceae family,  together with another well-known member of the family,  hops (Humulus). The family has recently been expanded  to contain 9 other genera (Stevens 2001). The following  
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 5 
  
  

2i. 
2j. 
  
  

2k. 
2l. 
Figure 2 (continued) Botanical characteristics of cannabis inflorescences 2i. Trichomes along anther scale. 
2j. Trichomes along the pedicel of a male flower. 
2k. Close-up of glandular trichomes. 
2l. Magnification of multicellular glandular trichomes with electron microscopy.  
Photographs courtesy of: (2a–b, e, f) The Wo/Men’s Alliance for Medical Marijuana (WAMM), Santa Cruz, CA; (2c, h) Gianpaolo Grassi, CRA-CIN, Industrial  Crop Research Center, Rovigo, Italy; (2d, g, i–k) © David J Potter, Salisbury, UK; (2l) University of Mississippi, University, MS.
describes the published range of morphological diversity  within plants recognized as Cannabis spp. 
Morphological Characterization of Cannabis L. Herbaceous annual, taprooted (taproot not developed on veg etatively propagated/cloned plants). Plants dioecious (male  and female flowers occur on separate plants) and rarely mon oecious (male and female flowers occur on the same plant).  Monoecious plants are often referred to as “hermaphrodites.”  True hermaphrodites bear bisexual flowers and are less com mon, whereas monoecious plants bear unisexual male and  female flowers at different locations on the plant. Staminate  
(male) plants tend to be taller but less robust than pistillate  (female) plants. Height and degree of branching depends  on both genetic and environmental factors (UNODC 2009).  Root: A laterally branched taproot, generally 30–40 cm deep in  loose soil, and up to 2.5 m deep; the horizontal spread of lateral  roots also depends on the soil type, up to 80 cm in width. Stem:  Erect, furrowed, round to obtusely hexagonal in cross-section  often hollow, 0.2–6 m (usually 1–3 m) tall, simple to well  branched; branchlets densely pubescent; staminate (male)  plants usually taller and less robust, compared with pistillate  (female) plants (Raman 1998); stipules linear, lateral, acute,  persistent, 2–5 mm. Leaves: Alternate or opposite basally on  
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 6 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
  

3a. 
3b. 
3c. 3d. 
Figure 3 Botanical characteristics of cannabis leaf 
3a. Adaxial (upper) surface of a typical cannabis leaf (9 leaflets). 3b. Adaxial (upper) surface of a typical cannabis leaf (5 leaflets). 
3c. Abaxial (lower) surface of a typical cannabis leaf.  3d. Adaxial (upper) surface of a typical cannabis leaf.
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 7 
3e. 3f. 
Figure 3 (continued) Botanical characteristics of cannabis leaf 3e. Upper and lower surface of broad-leaf strain (“indica” type). 3f. Upper and lower surface of narrow-leaf strain (“sativa” type). Photographs courtesy of: (3a–d) WAMM, Santa Cruz, CA; (3e–f) Gianpaolo  Grassi, CRA-CIN, Industrial Crop Research Center, Rovigo, Italy.
stem, with the longest in the middle, palmately compound,  basally with (3)5–11(13) leaflets, apically with 1–3 leaflets.  Leaflet: Usually lanceolate, sometimes oblanceolate to lin ear, uneven in size, (3)7–15 x (0.2)0.5–1.5(2) cm, ; margin  serrate, with fine, very acute to coarser, almost blunt serra tions; apex acuminate; petiole 2–7 cm; leaf blade abaxially  whitish-green, strigose, and rarely whitish-clear to opaque to  brownish glandular trichomes, adaxially dark green with cys tolithic trichomes. Blade surfaces abaxially sparsely to densely  pubescent. Staminate (male) inflorescences: Axillary or  terminal, erect, up to ca. 25 cm, a lax panicle or a compound  cyme. Male flowers: Yellowish green, nodding; pedicel  2–4 mm, thin; sepals imbricate, ovate to lanceolate, 2.5–4  mm, membranous, with sparse prostrate trichomes; petals  absent; filament 0.5–1 mm, straight in bud; anthers oblong;  rudimentary pistil small. Pistillate (female) inflorescences: Pseudospikes, congested, erect to spreading, among leaf-like  bracts and bracteoles. Female flowers: Green, sometimes  purple to red and/or mottled or streaked, sessile; bract (sub tending floral leaves) proximal upper surfaces are densely  covered by capitate stalked trichomes, with serrate or entire  margins (Potter 2009); bracteole (alternately called a calyx,  perigonium, or perigonal bract) usually refers to a small (4–8  mm long), fused, conically-shaped sheath that completely  envelopes the ovary and loosely encloses mature fruit, densely  hispid or pilose, covered with resinous glandular trichomes;  perianth thin, papery, undivided, closely appressed to the  ovary and mature fruit, often reduced or absent in cultivated  
forms, often marbled with light and dark areas; ovary superior,  sessile, subglobose, one-locular with one pendulous anatro pous ovule; styles 2, long-linear, caduceus, emerging from  the apex of the bracteole. Achenes (fruits): Solitary, usually  green-brown but also white or gray, with a pale, fine reticula tion pattern on the smooth surface (in cultivated forms), or  with brown or purple mottling (in strains retaining wild-type  morphology and a persistent perianth), ovoid to oblong in  outline, somewhat compressed (lenticular) in cross section,  2–5 mm; endosperm fleshy and oily; embryo strongly curved;  cotyledon fleshy. 
The upper leaves, unfertilized (female) flower heads, and  flower bracts of the female plant are the primary source of  cannabinoids in Cannabis. The cannabinoids are enclosed  in tiny (just visible to the eye) glandular trichomes occurring  in several different forms: sessile glands (trichomes without  a stalk); small bulbous glandular trichomes with one-celled  stalks; and long, multicellular-stalked glandular trichomes  mainly present on bracts and bracteoles surrounding female  flowers (Hammond and Mahlberg 1977; Raman 1998; Starks  1990; see Table 2). Numerous unicellular non-glandular  trichomes are located on both surfaces of the leaves, bracts,  and bracteoles. Those on the upper (adaxial) epidermal  surface frequently bear calcium carbonate crystals (cystoliths)  at the base. The presence and distribution of the rigid,  curved cystolithic non-glandular trichomes on the upper leaf  surfaces and of the fine, slender non-cystolithic non-glandular  trichomes on both upper and lower surfaces are characteristic  of Cannabis and enable positive identification of even  fragmented material (UNODC 2009). 
Although some selections of cannabis are day-neutral  (flower under any day-length; sometimes referred to as  “autoflowering”), most are short-day-length plants (needing  
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 8 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
4a. 4b. 
4c. 4d. 
Figure 4 Botanical characteristics of cannabis staminate (male) flow ers and stem 
4a. Male (staminate) flowers. 
4b. Close-up of male flowers showing primary floral characteristics. 4c. Vegetative stem of mature plant showing node, furrows, stipules,  and axillary branching. 
4d. Stalk of purple variety. 
Photographs courtesy of: WAMM, Santa Cruz, CA. 
a long, usually ≥ 14 hours dark period) and shift from  vegetative to reproductive growth upon exposure to short day length conditions. With the change to reproductive growth,  the leaf pair arrangement changes from opposite to an  alternate, spiral arrangement (Potter 2004). Distinguishing  male and female plants during vegetative growth is difficult,  although the female plant tends to be stockier and to flower  later than the male plant (Raman 1998). Occasionally, one  
or few individual flowers are produced in lower leaf axils  to allow the determination of the plant’s sex during the  vegetative phase of growth. 
Distribution: Humans have dispersed cannabis worldwide  over the past 10,000 years from probable origins in Central  Asia, the Northwestern Himalayas, and China to a variety  of habitats throughout the temperate and tropical regions  of the world. Within the purported native range, the  plant occurs in open, disturbed habitats, such as along  riverbanks, bottomlands, and hillsides. In North America,  C. sativa subsp. sativa is reported naturalized or ruderal  in most all states and provinces across the Northeast,  Midwest, and Eastern Plains, occurring at altitudes 0–2000  m (USDA-NRCS 2014). The plant can be observed in  fertile, moist farmlands, in open habitat, in waste areas,  and, occasionally, in fallow fields and open woodlands  (Small 1997). In addition to the habitats in which the 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 9 
5a. 5b. 
Figure 5 Botanical characteristics of cannabis seed (achene) 
5a. Developing seed (fruit; formally known as “achene”). 
5b. Seed emerging from and surrounded by the sac-like fused  
calyx. 
5c. Mature seeds. 
Photographs courtesy of: Gianpaolo Grassi, CRA-CIN, Industrial Crop  
Research Center, Rovigo, Italy. 
machine, sometimes leaving portions of the leaf bases  
and stiff petioles. The segments are generally light to  
dark green, various shades of purple to dark purple, or  
from green-brown to brown and may include whole,  
or fragments of, reduced upper leaves, stems, bracts,  
bracteoles, rudimentary calyx, immature ovules, styles,  
and glandular and non-glandular trichomes. Cannabis  
selections vary to the extent of the length of the internodes  
within the inflorescence. Those of short length have  
a denser cluster of flowers so that the segment pieces  
appear more rounded; those of a longer length have a  
greater distance between individual flowers. Variation  
5c. 
plants would otherwise be naturalized if growth were not  actively curtailed, cannabis is widely cultivated outdoors  and indoors for both recreational and medicinal purposes. 
Macroscopic Identification 
Cannabis raw material is most often supplied as variously  sized, 1.5–15 cm or longer, branches and branchlets,  sometimes broken up, of the dried inflorescences of  pistillate plants. These inflorescence segments, colloquially  known as “buds,” are often closely trimmed by hand or 
exists between selections in the size and prominence of the  various parts. Morphological characteristics and variation  in color of cannabis products are influenced by the variety  as well as environmental factors including light, water,  nutrients, and methods of cultivation, harvesting, handling,  and curing. For macroscopic examination of material that  is stuck together, soak the material in strong alcohol (70%)  to dissolve the resin, pour off the alcohol, and then soak  in water. The leaves, stems, bracts, flowers, and fruit can  then be separated. However, material prepared in this  manner should not be used for quantitative analysis due  to constituent loss. 
Stems: Light brown, pale green, or variously mottled or  entirely purple in color. Stems within inflorescences are  
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 10 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
6a. 6b. 
6c. 6d. 
6e. 6f.
Figure 6 Macroscopic characteristics of cannabis inflorescence 
6a. Dried, untrimmed pistillate inflorescences of morphological type “sativa.” 
6b. Dried pistillate inflorescences of morphological type “sativa” (bottom – untrimmed; top – trimmed). 
6c. Storage effects on color of cannabis material (left – 1-year-old; right – new harvest). 
6d. Dried pistillate inflorescences of morphological type “indica” (bottom – untrimmed; middle and top – trimmed). 6e. Close-up of a dried pistillate inflorescence (note the visible glandular trichomes). 
6f. Powdered dry cannabis material (leaves and pistillate inflorescences). 
Photographs courtesy of: (6a–e) WAMM, Santa Cruz, CA; (6f) University of Mississippi, University, MS. 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 11 
often cut just below the node. Stems branch freely and  repeatedly but the extent of branching is dependent on  environmental and hereditary factors, and the method of  cultivation. Nodes and internodes are distinct, with alter 
nate branches, and can be of varying length. Stem texture is  fibrous and the surface is longitudinally furrowed with short  stiff hairs. The cortex and wood are thin with the pith white  and porous. Larger diameter (≥ 3 mm) branch pieces are  often sourced from terminal shoots. Material with thinner  stems is most often from lateral inflorescence branches or  from side branches cut from terminal inflorescences. 
Upper leaves: Rarely present in cultivated plants as these  are often removed through mechanical or hand trimming.  When present, the upper leaves are light to dark green,  sometimes purple or mottled purple in color, or brown,  dried and shriveled, and sometimes clasping the inflores 
cence. After trimming, only the base of the petioles is typi cally left as stiff remnants at the nodes. 
Bracts: Light to dark green or brownish-green. Numerous,  alternate, with narrow stipules at the base; some are simple  and others tri-partite, but in both cases the segments are lan ceolate with an entire margin. Bracts subtending the spikes  are often divided into 5 linear leaflets. Those subtending the  individual flowers usually have 3 minute leaflets. Bracts and  stipules both show a marked tendency to shrivel upon dry 
ing, and in some cases only the veins of the bracts remain  intact. With magnification (10x) numerous glandular and  non-glandular trichomes are seen. 
Table 1 Microscopic characteristics of cannabis inflorescence powder 
Bracteoles: Light to dark green or brownish-green; formed  in pairs in the axil of a bract. Ovate with an acute apex and  incurved at the base to enclose the flower or fruit. With  magnification (10x) numerous glandular and non-glandular  trichomes are observed. 
Flowers: A single flower is formed in the axil of each bracte ole. Calyx is light to dark green or brownish, pubescent, and  somewhat folded around the ovary or fruit. Ovary is single chambered containing a single campylotropous ovule, sur rounded by the thin hairy perianth. Attached to the flower  are 2 slender, long, pubescent styles and stigmas, spreading  at the apex, and of a dark reddish-brown to orange color.  Plants are dioecious. Male flowers have stamens; female  flowers do not. 
Fruit: The fruit of cannabis is an achene and, together  with the enclosed seed, is commonly referred to as the  “seed.” Unless specifically desired, seeds should be lacking  from properly harvested material. Achenes separate easily  from dry samples. The achene is 2–5 mm in diameter and  enclosed within an enlarged persistent perianth surrounded  by bracts; solitary, somewhat compressed (lenticular) ovoid,  glossy, off-white, green, brown-green, or yellowish-green  often mottled in purple. The thin wall of the ovary tightly  covers the shell of the seed. The pericarp is dry and brittle  and finely reticulate. The endosperm and cotyledons are  fleshy. The embryo is curved. 
Trichomes: Two primary categories of trichomes are pres ent; glandular, cannabinoid-producing trichomes, and non 
Bracts 
Bracteoles 
Polygonal upper epidermis cells with faintly striated cuticle and few trichomes; sinuous-walled lower epidermis cells with anomocytic stomata and abundant trichomes; small clusters of calcium oxalate in the mesophyll cells. 
Polygonal upper epidermis cells with beaded walls; sinuous lower epidermis cells with slightly beade walls, anomocytic stomata, and tapering, unicellular covering trichomes; mesophyll similar to that of bracts, containing calcium oxalate clusters. 
Trichomes and glands Glandular and non-glandular trichomes.
Bracts 52–727 
Stigma Fragments occurring as epidermal cells with reddish-brown papillae. 
Seed Fragments mainly visible as thick-walled sclereids of the epicarp. Occurring as epidermis with large cystolith trichomes, parenchyma containing clusters of calcium 
Stem 
Bracts Leaflet 
oxalate, fibers, which are normally unlignified, vessels lignified with reticulate or annular thickening, and lactiferous tissue containing red-brown content. 
Polygonal upper epidermis cells with faintly striated cuticle and few trichomes; sinuous-walled lower epidermis cells with anomocytic stomata and abundant trichomes; small clusters of calcium oxalate in the mesophyll cells. 
Upper epidermis cells wavy-walled with striated cuticle, stomata absent, sessile glandular trichomes and cystolith trichomes abundant; lower epidermis wavy-walled cells with anomocytic stomata and all trichomes characteristic of cannabis. 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 12 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
Figure 7 Microscopic characteristics of cannabis (illustrations) 7a. Lower epidermis of leaf showing cystolithic trichome. 7b. Upper epidermis of leaf with underlying palisade. 7c. Upper epidermis of bract with underlying palisade. 7d. Upper epidermis of bracteole with underlying calcium oxalate. 7e. Lower epidermis of bracteole with stoma and underlying calcium  oxalate crystal. 
7f. Fragments of multicellular glandular trichomes. 
7g. Detached sessile glands. 
7h. Small glandular trichomes. 
7i. Part of a covering trichome. 
7j. Part of large warty covering trichome from stem. 7k. Fragment of stigma. 
Microscopic images courtesy of Elizabeth Williamson, University of Reading,  Reading, UK. 
glandular, non-cannabinoid-producing trichomes. Both can  be observed with 10–20x magnification (see Table 2). Powder: Dull light to dark green, to brown; sometimes  purplish. When viewing coarsely ground material under  20x magnification, fragments of lower epidermis of leaves  contain wavy vertical walls and oval stomata, while upper  epidermis pieces have straight vertical walls and no stomata  (see Table 1). Most of these characters require higher mag nification if viewing finely ground powder. 
Organoleptic Characterization 
Aroma: Historically, the aroma of cannabis was described  as agreeably aromatic, strong and heavy, peculiar, and  narcotic. In recent decades, breeding and selection have  produced a wide variety of aromas within cannabis strains.  Commercial marketing of cannabis has led to the use of  numerous comparative terms to describe the aromas of can-
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 13 
Figure 8 Microscopic characteristics of cannabis; cross section  of a fruiting bract 
8f. Developing glandular trichome. 8g. Stalk of a glandular trichome. 
a: cystolithic trichome; b: large glandular trichome with several cells in head and stalk;  
8a. Cystolithic trichome. 
8h. Palisade cell. 
c: head of one of the large glandular trichomes; d: small glandular trichome with bicel 
8b. Glandular multicellular trichome. 
8i. Cluster crystal of calcium oxalate. 
lular head and unicellular stalk; e: thick walled conical trichomes; f: large developing  
8c. Surface view of large glandular trichome head. 
8j. Parenchymal cell. 
glandular trichome; g: stalk of a large glandular trichome; h: palisade cell; i: cluster crystal;  
8d. Glandular trichome with bicellular head and unicellular stalk. 8e. Thick-walled conical trichome. 
j: parenchymal cell; k: stoma 
nabis strains. The aromas as described in modern advertis ing include: peculiar, narcotic, strong, sweet to sour, fruity  to pungent, agreeable, aromatic, fresh and sweet, euphoric,  spicy citrusy, musty, skunky, acrid, juniper, floral, sour, die sel, vanilla, complex, blueberry, pineapple, perfumed, piney,  sandalwood, mango, skunky-cheese, and more. 
Color: Color is influenced by variety and mode of cultiva tion, handling, harvest, and curing. Pistillate inflorescence  parts vary in color from bright, light green to deeper, dark  green through dark purple to light yellow-gold to brown,  sometimes with flowers having long reddish-orange to brown  styles and stigmas. Indoor grown material is often lighter  green to bright purple, while material cultivated outdoors  tends to be darker green to green-brown to dark purple. The  color should be consistent throughout each sample and  should not show signs of gray or black, which are indicators  of fungal infection. Inflorescence parts with a high density  of glandular and non-glandular trichomes can appear bright  whitish and crystalline. 
Taste and mouth feel: Bitter, somewhat acrid, resinous,  sticky, and pungent.  
8k. Stoma. 
Source: The botany and chemistry of cannabis. Joyce CRB and Curry SH  (eds.) (1970) J & A Churchill, London.
Microscopic Identification 
Bracts and Leaves: Microscopically, transverse sections of the  leaflets and bracts show a dorsiventral structure. The palisade  consists of a single layer (rarely 2 layers) of cylindrical cells  and the spongy tissue of 2–4 layers of rounded parenchyma;  cluster crystals of calcium oxalate are present in all parts of the  mesophyll. The upper epidermis cells bear unicellular, sharply  pointed, curved conical trichomes, approximately 150–220  μm long, with enlarged bases containing cystoliths of calcium  carbonate; the lower epidermis bears conical trichomes, which  are longer, approximately 340–500 μm, and more slender,  but without cystoliths. Both upper and lower epidermises bear  numerous glandular trichomes, and on the underside glandular  trichomes are especially abundant over the midrib. The glandu lar trichomes are of 3 types: (1) a long multicellular stalk and a  multicellular head with approximately 8 radiating club-shaped  cells; (2) a short unicellular stalk and a bicellular, rarely 4-cell,  head; (3) sessile (without stalk) with a multicellular head. Both  upper and lower epidermises in the midrib region are followed  by a few layers of collenchyma. The vascular bundle is com posed of phloem, made up of small cells, and xylem vessels  arranged in radial rows. The lower epidermis displays numerous  trichomes of 3 types: non-glandular, non-glandular cystolithic,  
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 14 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
9a. 9b. 9c. 
9d. 9e. 9f. 
9g. 9h. 9i. 
Figure 9 Microscopic characteristics of cannabis 
9a. Upper (adaxial) leaflet surface showing epidermal cells with anticlinal walls. 
9b. Upper (adaxial) leaflet epidermis showing curved anticlinal walls. 
9c. Cystolithic trichomes on the upper surface of the leaflet (surface view). 
9d. Cystolithic trichomes on the upper surface of the leaflet (surface view; polarized light). 
9e. Cystolithic trichomes on the upper surface of female flower bract (surface view; polar 
ized light). 
9f. Cystolithic trichome (lateral view; polarized light). 
9g. Cystolithic trichomes on the leaflet margin (lateral view; polarized light). 
9h. Transverse section at the leaflet midrib. 
9i. Stomata on the lower (abaxial) surface of the leaflet (surface view). 
9j. Lower (abaxial) leaflet surface showing long unicellular non-cystolithic trichomes 
Microscopic images courtesy of: (9a-e; g-l) University of Mississippi, University, MS; (9f, m) Reinhard  
9j.
Länger, AGES PharmMed, Vienna, Austria; (9n) ©2013 David J. Potter, Salisbury, UK; (9o–u) Elan  Sudberg, Costa Mesa, CA. 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 15 
9k. 9l. 9m. 
9n. 9o. 9p. 
9q. 9r. 9s. 
Figure 9 (continued) Microscopic characteris 
tics of cannabis 
9k. Non-cystolithic trichomes on the lower  
leaflet surface (polarized light). 
9l. Non-cystolithic trichomes on the lower  
surface of the bract (polarized light). 
9m. Multicellular-stalked glandular trichomes  
on bract. 
9n. Multicellular-stalked glandular (left) and  
non-glandular cystolithic trichomes (right). 
9o. Upper epidermis of bracteole showing  
underlying calcium oxalate cluster crys tals in the mesophyll. 
9p. Terminal end of a senesced stigma. 9q. Mid-section of a senesced stigma show ing unicellular trichomes with rounded  ends. 
9t. 9u. 
9r. Multicellular glandular trichomes. 
9s. Multicellular glandular trichome showing orange-brown resin-oil deposits. 9t. Glandular trichome showing orange-brown resin-oil deposits. 
9u. Sessile glandular trichome showing orange-brown resin-oil deposits either exuding  or retracting through the stalk.
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 16 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
Figure 10 Microscopic characteristics of cannabis inflorescence powder 
10a. Non-glandular conical trichomes on the upper epidermis of leaflet. 
10b. Cystolithic trichome with warty cuticle. 
10c. Head of glandular trichome showing cells radiating from basal cells. 
10d. Surface view of epidermis showing trichomes and cystoliths. 
10e. Fragments of vessel elements showing spiral wall thickenings. 
10f. Lower epidermis showing anomocytic stomata. 
10g. Non-glandular conical trichome with cystolith. 
10h. Head of a glandular trichome covered with cuticle. 
10i. Cortical parenchyma showing crystals of calcium oxalate. 
10j. Cortical parenchyma showing simple starch grains. 
Photographs courtesy of: University of Mississippi, University, MS.
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 17 
Table 2 Types and distribution of cannabis trichomes 
Trichome type Cannabinoid producing Distribution Image All aerial epidermal tissues.  
Sessile (unstalked)  
glands Yes Bulbous (one-cell 
Especially abundant on the  underside (abaxial) surface  of leaves and bracts and  outer surface of bracteoles. 
stalked) trichomes Possibly All aerial epidermal tissues. Glandular 
Multicellular 
stalked trichomes Yes 
Bracts, bracteoles, and  (rarely) on uppermost  leaves; both surfaces. 
Non-glandular 
trichomes No Leaves, bracts; mostly upper  
Cystolithic  
epidermis only. 
trichomes No All aerial epidermal  
Non-cystolithic  
surfaces. 
Photographs © 2013 David J. Potter, Salisbury, UK. 
and glandular. Clusters of calcium oxalate crystals are scattered  in the ground tissue. The simultaneous presence of cystolithic  trichomes on the upper surface and non-cystolithic trichomes  and sessile glandular trichomes on the lower surface of the leaf 
lets is characteristic of cannabis (UNODC 2009). Bracteoles: Bracteoles have an undifferentiated mesophyll  of about 4 layers of cells, the lower hypodermal layer having  a cluster crystal of calcium oxalate in almost every cell. The  abaxial surface bears numerous bulbous, sessile, and stalked  glandular trichomes as well as unicellular conical trichomes.  These trichomes are most numerous where the bracteole curves  in to enclose the ovary or fruit. 
Flowers: In the stigmatic epidermis, nearly every cell has an  extended papilla about 90–180 µm long with a rounded apex. Stem: The stem epidermis bears very few trichomes similar  to those of the leaves. In cross-section of the stem, large,  unbranched laticiferous tubes can be seen in the phloem. Well developed bundles of pericyclic fibers are present to the interior  
of the phloem. Both pith and cortex contain calcium oxalate  cluster crystals, about 25–30 µm in diameter.  
For microscopic examination, leaves, bracts, and twigs  can be mounted in alcohol, water, or chloral hydrate solution.  Some compounds may be diluted or lost when prepared  in this manner so these samples should not be used for  quantitative analysis 
C o m m e r c i a l S o u r c e s  a n d H a n d l i n g 
In commerce, cannabis generally refers to the dried inflo rescences and subtending leaves and stems of the female  plant, commonly referred to as the bud. Considerable efforts  in breeding and selection have produced cannabis strains  that are uniquely suited for either fiber (hemp; rich in bast  phloem cells in the stem) or drug production (cannabinoid-
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 18 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
containing resin secreted by epidermal glands) (Small and  Marcus 2002). 
The most important cannabinoid in this context is the  psychoactive molecule THC. Fiber types are economically  important in China, Europe, Canada and many other  territories, and grown in subtropical and temperate climates.  Drug types however are more typically acclimatized to  semi-tropical zones. In Canada, most Western US states,  and Northern Europe, the climate is not optimal for most  drug strains, encouraging indoor or greenhouse cultivation.  Since the 1970s, in the US and Canada, a law enforcement  crackdown and large-scale eradication efforts may have  inadvertently encouraged more indoor growers. Breeding for  high THC strains (predominantly for recreational purposes)  has occurred historically and very aggressively over the past  40 years, with growers in California, the Pacific Northwest  and British Columbia, and Holland crossing plants of  Afghan, Columbian, and Mexican origin in order to increase  THC yields well above 10% THC. Potency is especially high  when only female plants are grown. Unfertilized female  cannabis plants, (widely known as sinsemilla, a Spanish  term meaning without seeds) utilized no energy in seed  production and diverted more to total THC biosynthesis.  Later changes obtained through breeding and controlled  indoor growing conditions led to strains with increased total  THC potency.  
In the 1960s and 1970s, the average percentage of THC  in herbal cannabis was less than 1%, although anomalous  samples reaching 9.5% were reported (reviewed in Mikuriya  and Aldrich 1988). In 1980 (Turner 1983) average total  THC concentrations were less than 1.5%, but rose to  approximately 3.3% in 1983 and 1984, fluctuated around  3% until 1992, and increased to 4.7% (average) in 1997.  Since 1997, due to the increasing prevalence of strains  grown using a variety of techniques, samples have been  found to contain a mean of 8.8% and anomalous samples  have contained as high as 29% total THC. In the same  time period, other cannabinoid concentrations (e.g., CBD)  remained relatively stable (ElSohly et al. 2000; Mehmedic  et al. 2010). 
In the European Union (EU) as a whole, total THC  potency of crude cannabis has not had the same steady upward  trend as in the US. For example, between 1998 and 2002 EU  supplies ranged from a low of 1.1% [Hungary 2002], a high of  16.9% [Italy 1998], and a mean of approximately 7.7% total  THC (EMCDDA 2004). In most European countries the  current upper legal limit for cultivated cannabis for industrial  purposes is 0.2% THC (for comparison Canada: 0.3%) with  a ratio of CBD to THC greater than one (UNODC 2009).  There are currently no minimum or maximum THC-CBD  concentrations legally mandated. 
Comparison of total THC values, as well as interpretation  of trends in most countries, should be taken as relative  numbers due to intraspecies differences, inconsistent  sampling, and variance in analytical techniques, among  other factors affecting total THC concentration and yields. 
Reported US values can be taken as more, but still relatively,  consistent, as they are predominantly based on analyses  through NIDA’s Marijuana Potency Monitoring Program. 
In comparison with THC-predominant strains, fiber  strains contain < 1% total THC and have a very low  level of psychoactivity (De Backer et al. 2009; Galal et al.  2009). Additionally, due to putative therapeutic effects of  CBD, CBD-predominant strains are being developed both  domestically and internationally. 
Sourcing 
Cannabis is cultivated in at least 172 countries (EMCDDA  2008). North America is the largest self-supplying market  for herbal cannabis. Europe is the largest consumer market  for cannabis resin, which is predominantly supplied by  Morocco (EMCDDA 2012). 
There are 3 primary sources of indoor and outdoor  cultivated cannabis in the United States: 1. Federally legal  material; 2. Material that is regulated by select states; 3.  Material that is traded illegally according to state or federal  law. Sources in other countries vary, with some (e.g., the  Netherlands) exerting national controls on the production of  cannabis. Despite such national controls, illegal supplies still  exist. Sources in the US are briefly described below. 
Federally Legal Cannabis: Because cannabis is classified  as a Schedule 1 controlled substance, its growth, transport,  possession, and use are stringently restricted. The Coy W.  Waller Laboratory Complex of the University of Mississippi  is the only source of cannabis for research and medicinal  purposes that is legally approved federally. Since 1968,  the National Institute on Drug Abuse, and its predecessor  agency, has contracted with the University of Mississippi  (UM) to grow, harvest, and process cannabis and to provide  material to licensed facilities across the country for federally  approved research purposes. UM also receives and collects  samples of cannabis seized by law enforcement to determine  the potency of confiscated samples and to document nation al drug trends. The federal government continues to legally  provide cannabis grown by UM for medicinal use to the few  remaining patients in the Compassionate Investigational  New Drug program started in 1978. 
According to federal regulations, transfer of cannabis  requires that material originate from a Drug Enforcement  Administration (DEA)-registered facility and be sent directly  to another DEA-registered facility. DEA-registered facilities  that receive or transfer cannabis from or to a non-registered  source, risk loss of their DEA registration and criminal  penalties. 
State-Regulated Cannabis: Numerous states have adopted  initiatives allowing the medicinal use of cannabis and pro vide provisions for growing, accessing, possessing, and using  
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 19 
cannabis. Additionally, Colorado and Washington approved  the non-medical use of cannabis in 2014. Regarding medi cal use, state regulations vary greatly, often varying between  counties and municipalities, and often changing. Sometimes,  cannabis may be grown by a patient who, based on a physi cian’s recommendation, has been given approval to use can nabis medicinally. In other cases, designated caregivers cul tivate cannabis and supply products to individual patients,  or to members of a collective. Often, cannabis products are  made available to patients through dispensaries. In all cases,  the amount that can be grown or possessed is limited, with a  variety of restrictions. Federal regulators have formally stated  they will only take action against those not complying with  state regulations governing the medicinal use of cannabis  (Cole 2013), while maintaining their authority to respond  when actions are deemed outside of compliance with state  regulations. Additionally, Federal policies contend that  states do not have the legal right to regulate cannabis. Thus,  current exercise of federal policy is inconsistent with state  policy and also inconsistently enforced. 
Illegally Traded Cannabis: By far the overwhelming major ity of cannabis used and traded in the United States is from  illegal sources. Most of this material is traded for recreational  purposes and lesser amounts are used for medical purposes,  either with some basis of legal sanction or for unapproved  medicinal use. Federal regulators actively work to curtail the  illicit trade of cannabis. 
In the United States, it is estimated that 17% of the  domestic cultivation of cannabis occurs indoors under  controlled conditions (Gettman 2006). Cannabis is grown  in substantial quantities in every state within the US. Illicit  imports predominantly originate in Mexico and, to a lesser  extent, in Canada. This illegal supply primarily fulfills the  illicit recreational market, but may find its way into medicinal  use (UNODC 2011). 
State-regulated or illegally traded cannabis is supplied  from material produced either outdoors (in temperate, sub tropic, or tropical zones) or indoors throughout all climates.  Indoor production of cannabis is concentrated in developed  countries, such as in North America, Europe, and Oceania. 
Cultivation 
There is a plethora of information regarding the cultiva tion of cannabis. The following information provided is  specifically relevant to the development of material to be  used medicinally. This information does not take into con sideration any of the production methods specifically used  to enhance total THC content for recreational purposes, the  large number of strains that are bred, or practices employed  for fulfilling various recreational desires (e.g. differing  organoleptic profiles). 
The Ministry of Health, Welfare, and Sport in the  Netherlands developed a set of guidelines for the cultivation  of cannabis specifically for purposes of medicinal use, all  
of which is grown indoors. The key guidelines are relevant  to outside growing as well and are provided below along  with additional information that can contribute to making  a quality medicinal product. There are advantages and  disadvantages with both indoor and outdoor growing. 
Seed and Clone Selection 
Selection of seed and clones is based upon both the strain  desired and growing environment. Growing from seed  results in a portion of the crop being male plants. This can  be avoided by starting with clones. Cross breeding of indica 
and sativa strains has resulted in the hybrid commonly  known as “skunk” which is reportedly 75% sativa and 25%  indica and combines the high THC concentration of C. sativa with the growth and yield of C. indica (UNODC  2009). 
Plant Selection 
All material to be propagated, whether from seed or clone,  must be identified to genus, species, variety, and chemotype.  Plants should be traceable to origin and be free of pests and  disease as is practically attainable to ensure healthy growth.  Cuttings of female plants are typically used as propagation  material for the production of cannabis in order to avoid  male plants. Restricting male plants prevents seed fertiliza tion, which allows the female plants to produce more flow 
ers and increased production of resin and cannabinoids.  Additionally, plants showing an anomalous concentration  of yellow coloring, reflecting a lack of chlorophyll, will not  be robust. This can result in misshapen leaves that can curl  and turn into each other, and interfere with the growth of  the plant. During the entire production process (cultivation,  harvest, drying, packaging), the presence of male plants as  well as different species, strains, or different plant parts must  be monitored and removed if present. 
Soil and Fertilization 
Cannabis prefers neutral to alkaline loamy and sandy soils,  with good water-holding capacity that is not subject to water  logging, and an optimum pH of 6.5–7.2. In hydroponic  growing, the nutrient solution is best at 5.8–6.0 (Cervantes  2006). Growing mediums for medicinal cannabis should  be free of contaminants, such as those introduced from  sludge, metals, pesticides, and waste products not required  for appropriate growing. If manure is used, it should be  thoroughly composted and must be devoid of human feces.  Fertilizers should be used in such a way that leaching is kept  to a minimum. 
Irrigation 
Irrigation should be controlled and only applied according  to the actual needs of the cannabis plant to prevent over  watering. The water used must contain as few contaminants  as possible, such as fecal contamination, metals, herbicides, 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 20 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
pesticides and toxicologically hazardous substances (see  Limit Tests). 
Sexing 
Under outdoor growing conditions, plants display all sexual  characteristics at approximately 8 weeks, and to maturation  from seed. These early, fully formed and receptive pre-flow ers are used to determine the sex of the plants, to select seed  parents for breeding and for culling if desired. Flowering  can occur as early as 4 weeks and is dependent on strain and  environmental conditions (UNODC 2009). 
Male plants are generally culled, because of the relatively  low total THC content of the leaves compared to the  inflorescences of the female plant and to prevent pollination  of all plants (Chandra et al. 2013). Male plants can be tested  for their concentrations of specific cannabinoids (e.g., high or  low-yielding THC or CBD strains) and those plants used for  breeding depend on the class of cannabinoids desired. 
Outdoor Cultivation, Planting, and Maturity In the Northern Hemisphere, outdoor cultivation of seeds  normally begins late March to early April (depending on  environment). Full maturity of the plant is typically reached  by 6–8 months (depending on variety). The THCA content  increases as the plant matures, typically reaching its maxi mum at full budding stage, maintaining maximum levels  for 2–3 weeks after budding, and declining with the onset of  senescence. When grown from seeds outdoors, it is difficult  to maintain a constant chemical profile due to changing  environmental conditions (Chandra et al. 2013), and so  some growers (e.g., the Netherlands) only produce approved  medicinal products from material cultivated indoors where  all conditions can be controlled. Autoflowering strains  mature from seed to harvest in approximately 75 days. 
There are numerous advantages to outdoor cultivation.  Cannabis is relatively resistant to pests so pesticides are  seldom needed (McPartland et al. 2000). Growing plants  in well cared for soil allows for a more natural growing  environment, provides stresses that the plant would  experience in a natural environment, allows for natural  light cycles, does not require the intensive investment  in equipment needed for indoor cultivation, and, when  done properly, is more ecologically sound. The primary  disadvantages of cultivating cannabis outdoors is the inability  to control all growing conditions, many of which affect the  chemical profile, purity, and quality, potential for mold, and  logistics of harvest and processing. For example, changes  in weather may make it unfavorable to harvest when the  plant material has reached desired maturity level and  cannabinoid profile desired (Potter 2009), or may introduce  moisture from rain or fog that could result in damage to the  plants when harvest is anticipated. According to one report,  cannabinoid and terpenoid profiles of outdoor and indoor  cultivated plants were similar if the crops were harvested at  the same stage of maturity, as denoted by complete style and  stigma senescence. However, as outdoor cultivation requires  
a longer growing season than plants cultivated indoors, there  is greater chance for fungal development (e.g., Botrytis spp.),  especially in regions with autumn rain or fog (McPartland et  al 2000; Potter 2009). 
Indoor Cultivation 
Indoor cultivation occurs in a variety of locations (base ments, warehouses, converted grow houses, etc). The prima ry advantage of indoor cultivation is that it allows for control  of environmental conditions that would otherwise influence  cannabinoid profile. However, there are numerous disad vantages to indoor growing. Due to lack of insect predators  normally abundant in outdoor growing environments, can nabis grown indoors can be subject to insect infestation,  primarily spider mites. This leads to growers utilizing a host  of pesticides that can contaminate the medicinal material.  Soil composition and nutrient content and distribution in  purchased commercial soil mixes may have significantly var ied nutrient density that can lead to nutrient deficiencies or  excesses that negatively affect the plant. With indoor grow ing, artificial lighting conditions may also cause burning of  the plant. The following parameters are considered critical  for indoor cultivation (Chandra et al. 2013). 
Light: Cannabis requires high photosynthetic photon  flux density (PPFD) for photosynthesis and growth. Because  photosynthesis prefers certain wavelengths, PPFD is a  more accurate metric than simple irradiance (measured  in W/m2) or light intensity (measured in Lux or Lumens).  Chandra et al. 2008 report photosynthesis leveling off at  1500 μmol/m2/s PPFD. Different light sources can be used  for indoor propagation, namely, fluorescent light bulbs  for juvenile cuttings, and metal halide (MH) and/or high  pressure sodium (HPS) bulbs for established plants. MH  bulbs impart less PPFD than HPS bulbs per watt. Separate  ballasts are required to regulate MH and HPS bulbs. MH  and HPS bulbs should be placed 3–4 feet from the plants  to avoid overexposure. Photoperiods of 12 and 18 hours are  optimum for initiation of flowering and vegetative growth,  respectively. Ultraviolet (UVB) light increases THC yields,  although Potter and Duncombe (2012) conclude that the  small increase does not warrant human exposure to UVB. 
Humidity and moisture: Humidity plays a crucial  role in plant growth, starting from seed germination or  vegetative propagation/reproduction through budding and  harvesting. Juvenile plants require high humidity (ca. 75%),  vegetative cuttings require a regular water spray on the  leaves to maintain a high humidity in the microclimate  until the plants are well rooted, while the active vegetative  and flowering stages require 55–60% humidity (Chandra et  al. 2013). 
Temperature: The optimal temperature for growing  any given plant depends on its genetic origin and original  growth habitat. However, the photosynthetic maximum for  strains of tropical origin is 25–30 ˚C with a lower maximum  of 25 °C for plants of temperate origin (Bazzaz et al. 1975;  Chandra et al. 2008; 2011a).
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 21 
Carbon dioxide: Increased (doubled) ambient carbon  dioxide levels stimulate both photosynthesis (50%) and water  use efficiency (111%) in cannabis, resulting in increased  growth (Chandra et al. 2008; Chandra et al. 2011b).CO2  enrichment has been used in cannabis glasshouses for more  than 35 years. 
Irrigation: The optimal amount and frequency of  watering needed depends on a variety of factors including  environment, variety, and growth stage. Soil should be kept  evenly moistened during the early seedling and vegetative  stage. In established plants the top layer of soil should be  allowed to dry out before watering (Chandra et al. 2013). 
Air circulation: Regulation of gas and water vapor  exchange affects thermal conductance and energy budget  of the leaf and overall growth and physiology of the plants.  Electric fans can be used to facilitate the circulation of air  (Chandra et al. 2013). Plants exposed to oscillating fans  produce stronger stems, which lessens lodging in varieties  with heavy apical colas. 
Seed Propagation 
Seeds are typically planted in moist aerated soil. Germination  usually begins after 4 days with all seeds generally germinat ing within 15 days. For enhanced winter germination, seed ling heating mats can be placed under pots. A photoperiod  of 18 h of cool fluorescent lights should be used for seed lings. When transferred to larger pots, cool fluorescent lights  should be exchanged for full spectrum lights. At the end of  the vegetative growth, the photoperiod can be reduced to  12 h to initiate flowering. Flowers should emerge within 3  weeks (Chandra et al. 2013). 
Soil Propagation Through Vegetative Cuttings Cuttings from the lower branches of select female plants can  be used for vegetative propagation using a fresh segment of  branch (6–10 cm long) that contains at least 3 nodal seg ments and planted in soil, a liquid hydroponic medium, or  for in vitro micropropagation (Chandra et al. 2013). 
For soil propagation, cut a soft apical branch at a 45˚  angle immediately below a node, immediately dip in distilled  water to avoid any air bubble formation in the stem, then dip  in rooting hormone (e.g., Green Light, US), and plant in pots  of a coco natural growth medium with equal parts of sterile  potting soil and fertilome (e.g., Canna Continental, US).  Cover at least one of the nodes with soil. Irrigate regularly;  rooting occurs in 2–3 weeks; after 6 weeks, transplant into  larger pots. These can be maintained in a constant vegetative  state with 18 h light exposure (Chandra et al. 2013; Potter  2009). 
Hydroponics 
A small branch consisting of a growing tip with 2 or 3 leaves  is cut and immediately dipped in distilled water. Prior to dip 
ping the cutting in a rooting compound, a fresh cut is made  just above the first cut. The cuttings are inserted one inch  deep into a rockwool cube or a hydroton clay ball support ing medium. Plants are supplied with vegetative fertilizer  formula (e.g., Advanced Nutrients, Canada) and exposed  to a diffused light: dark cycle (18:6) for vegetative growth.  Rooting initiates in 2–3 weeks, followed by transplantation  to a larger hydroponic system. 
Micropropagation 
Seed raised plants are highly heterozygous due to the alloga mous nature of cannabis, while vegetative propagation of a  selected mother plant can only produce a certain number  of cuttings at a time, thus presenting difficulties when large  scale cultivation of cannabis is needed. Micropropagation  and tissue culture techniques have tremendous potential to  overcome these problems. Direct organogenesis using nodal  segments and axillary buds is the most reliable method  for clonal propagation since it upholds genetic unifor 
mity among progenies (Hartsel el al. 1983; Mandolino and  Ranalli 1999; Slusarkiewicz-Jarzina et al. 2005). An efficient  micropropagation protocol for mass propagation of drug type strains using apical nodal segments containing axillary  buds has been reported (Lata et al. 2009a; 2009b) as well  as the micropropagation of hemp using shoot tips (Wang et  al. 2009). Somaclonal variation produced by formation of  calli is a fundamental step for the genetic manipulation and  improvement in crops (Lata et al. 2002). Micropropagation  of cannabis through callus production has been reported,  including production of roots through cannabis calli (Fisse  et al. 1981), occasional shoot regeneration (Mandolino and  Ranalli 1999), and high frequency plant regeneration from  leaf tissue derived calli (Lata et al. 2010). 
Genetic Integrity 
Micropropagation of shoot tips, axillary buds, and nodal  cuttings generally maintain their genetic fidelity. However,  use of plant growth regulators and prolonged cultivation of  the plant can result in somaclonal variation (Chandra et al.  2013). 
Diseases and Pests Associated with Cannabis Cultivation There are a host of pests, bacteria, and fungi associated with  both indoor and outdoor cultivation of cannabis. Generally  speaking, plants cultivated outdoors in a healthy environ ment are relatively resistant to pests, so commercial pesti cides are often not needed (EMCDDA 2012; McPartland et  al 2000), and with indoor cultivation, most conditions can  be controlled. 
In outdoor cultivation, small animals, such as birds and  rabbits can eat sown seeds and emerging greenery. Insects  and nematodes are not a significant problem in healthy  growing environments that maintain healthy populations 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 22 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
11a. 
11b. 11c. 
Figure 11 Cultivation of cannabis at the University of Mississippi 11a–b. Micropropagated cannabis plants. 
11c. Rooted plant. 
11d. Field-grown cannabis. 
Photographs courtesy of: University of Mississippi, University, MS. 
11d.
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 23 
11e. 11f. 
Figure 11 (continued) Cultivation of cannabis at the University of  
Mississippi 
11e. Partially grown plants. 
11f. Fully grown plants. 
Photographs courtesy of: University of Mississippi, University, MS. 
Figure 12 Common fungal contamination of cannabis 
Photographs courtesy of: WAMM, Santa Cruz, CA
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 24 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
of natural predators. The primary concern with outdoor  growing, in addition to security and weather, are mold and  fungi, which have been addressed in detail by McPartland  (1996), among others. 
In indoor cultivation systems, the primary pests of  concern are spider mites, thrips, aphids and white flies.  Growers can use a host of natural (e.g., copper or sulfer  sprays, garlic [Allium sativum] and neem [Azadirachta  indica] solutions) or synthetic pest controls, while some  companies growing for medicinal preparations (e.g., GW  Pharmaceuticals, UK) control indoor pests with natural  predators. Application of any treatment has to be timed in a  manner that allows the treatment agent to be cleared prior  to harvest, as use of commercial pesticides at time of harvest  can pose a health risk to consumers, and all treatments can  affect the organoleptic profile of the material. 
Outbreaks of hepatitis associated with cannabis use have  been reported in Germany (Cates and Warren 1975) and  Mexico (Alexander 1987), where human excrement was  used as a fertilizer. 
Harvest 
Pre-harvest Considerations 
Cannabinoids and terpenoids are predominantly biosynthe sized and stored in the trichomes of the plant (Mahlberg et  al. 1984; Malingre et al. 1975; Turner et al. 1980a), which are  at their highest densities on mature inflorescences. Timing  of harvest can be determined based on chemical analysis of  the inflorescences, specifically for those compounds that are  
Physical Evaluation for Determining Optimal Harvest Time 1. When the largest percentage of styles and stigmas turn-reddish  brown and shrivel (senesce) (Chandra et al. 2013; Potter 2009);  the higher the percentage of senesced and stigmas and  styles, the greater the maturity. Appropriate harvest times  based on percent of senesced stigmas and styles are given as  75% (UNODC 2009) and 95% (Clarke 1981), varying according  to the variety and the grower’s personal preference. 2. Firmness of the inflorescence, which should display a relatively  firm resistance when pressed. 
3. Some growers suggest that the ideal harvest timing is indicated  by the color of the glandular trichomes. The resin head on  newly formed trichomes is crystal clear, but eventually turns  more cloudy and then almost opaque white before finally  turning brown with age. In some cases, trichomes turn brown  without experiencing a white phase. Although peak potency  and harvest timing is often associated with the clouding of the  trichome, research has shown that peak potency is achieved  in plants exhibiting clear trichomes (UMiss 2013 personal  communication to AHP, unreferenced). 
4. Organoleptic profile: At maturity, the aromatic terpenoid  composition of the inflorescence matures to the pungent, often  unique, strain-specific aroma. Over-maturity can be observed  as the inflorescences begin to develop leaves (Corral 2012,  personal communication to AHP, unreferenced). The timing  of harvest affects the total cannabinoid content (potency), its  psychoactive effects, and medicinal benefits.
13a. 13b. 13c. 
Figure 13 Maturation of cannabis inflorescences 
13a. Maturing female inflorescence showing no styles and stigmas. 
13b. Semi-mature female inflorescence showing light-colored styles and stigmas. 
13c. Matured female inflorescence showing shriveled reddish-brown styles and stigmas. 
Photographs courtesy of: (13a) WAMM, Santa Cruz, CA; (13b & c) © 2013 David J Potter, Salisbury, UK. 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 25 
most desired (e.g., tetrahydrocannabinolic acid [THCA] and  cannabidiolic acid [CBDA]) or more usually through obser vation and organoleptic evaluation. Cannabinoid ratios of  a particular strain of cannabis are genetically determined  (de Meijer et al. 2003), while cannabinoid levels (potency),  which are determined by biosynthetic pathways, are subject  to the influence of age and environmental factors, particu 
larly temperature, light, and humidity. In general, cannabi noid content reaches a maximum when inflorescences are  fully ripe and remain at this level until the onset of plant  
senescence (Chandra et al. 2013; Potter 2009). When using analytical techniques for determining  optimal harvest times, high performance liquid  chromatography (HPLC) or gas chromatography (GC)  are the most appropriate tools for quantitation of desired  compounds. These 2 methodologies can give different  quantitative values for the same plant, so consistent baselines  with either method should be established to determine the  
time of maximal potency. Thin layer chromatography  (TLC), promoted by commercial testing laboratories,  provides a qualitative comparison of cannabinoids, but  the method is not quantitative. High performance TLC  (HPTLC), can provide more accurate quantitative data  than standard TLC, but remains secondary to more accurate  methodologies. 
All stages of maturity are often present within an  inflorescence with mature flowers occurring at the base of  the inflorescences and younger, less mature flowers at the  apices or tips. Towards the end of the flowering process,  plant growth slows and fewer new florets are formed within  the inflorescence.  
Time of cannabis harvest depends upon which class  of compounds is desired (Potter 2009). Total THC content  varies widely with the particular strain and part. Analyses  by the United Nations (UNODC 2009) report total THC  values as highest in the inflorescences (10–12%) followed  

Figure 14 Glandular trichomes of Cannabis sativa showing THC-containing ducts at various stages of flowering 14a. 2 weeks. 
14b. 4 weeks. 
14c. 6 weeks. 
14d. 8 weeks post flowering.  
Photographs courtesy of: University of Mississippi, University, MS.
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 26 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
15a. 

15b. 

15c. 15d.
Figure 15 Mechanical trimming of freshly harvested cannabis inflorescences 15a. Hopper feeding freshly harvested inflorescences into the trimmer. 
15b. Leaves extend through the openings and are trimmed by blades below the spinning chamber,  removing ~90% of subtending leaves. 
15c. Trimmed inflorescences awaiting visual inspection before final trimming by hand. 15d. Trimmed inflorescences tumble into catch basin. 
Photographs courtesy of: WAMM, Santa Cruz, CA. 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 27 
by the leaves (1–2%), stalks (0.1–0.3%), and roots (< 0.03%).  Cannabinoids are almost completely absent in clean seeds. The ratio of THCA and CBDA is under strict genetic  control. Research suggests that the production of THCA or  CBDA, from the common precursor cannabigerolic acid  (CBGA), is closely controlled by 2 co-dominant alleles at a  single locus (de Meijer et al. 2003). As a result, cannabis plants  can be identified as belonging to any one of 3 chemotypes.  These can be THCA dominant (homozygous for the  THCA synthase allele), CBDA dominant (homozygous for  the CBDA synthase allele), or contain an approximately  equal mixture of the 2 (heterozygous condition). Cannabis  today is almost entirely derived from the THCA dominant  chemotype. The majority of seeds sold commercially for  the cultivation of recreational cannabis in Europe have  been found to be of the homozygous THCA chemotype,  with a small minority being the heterozygous mixed profile  THCA+CBDA chemotype (EMCDDA 2012). Over the past 3 decades worldwide, optimization of  growing techniques, domestic production versus imported  material, and selective breeding and cloning, among  other parameters, have focused on the development of  increasingly potent THC-yielding strains. Production of high  cannabinoid CBDA strains has been of more limited interest,  but breeding of CBDA-rich strains has been achieved (de  Meijer et al. 2003). An increasing number of heterozygous  mixed THCA/CBDA strains are being produced to provide  users with material with different pharmacological activity  than the pure THCA type; however, this is an exception not  a rule in both legal and illegal cannabis production. 
Optimal Harvest Times 
The optimal harvest time depends on the level of con stituents desired and environmental conditions of the crop.  Some growers (e.g., University of Mississippi) perform  analyses of their raw material daily to determine the optimal  time of harvest for peak THCA concentrations. Generally,  optimal harvest time is when the inflorescences reach full  maturity (Chandra et al. 2013). Optimal harvest time can  also be determined visually when at least ~75% of the  stigmas turn brown and shrivel (senesce) (UNODC 2009).  With higher degrees of maturity, higher concentrations of  THC will be produced. However, when resin heads shift  from a clear or cloudy color to brown, this indicates the  conversion of THC to CBN (Potter 2009) 
There are 2 primary ways to harvest inflorescences:  harvesting individual buds or branches as they ripen, and  harvesting the entire plant. When harvesting individual  buds or branches, the mature upper buds are harvested  first, usually by cutting approximately 38 cm (15-inch) long  branch sections, while the lower branches are given more  time to develop (Chandra et al. 2013). Collecting when  buds ripen allows other buds hidden in the canopy to ripen,  a process that takes approximately 10 days. Buds closest to  the outer edges, capturing the most light, typically ripen  first. 
Harvest is done in 4 primary steps: clipping a bud filled stem from a plant; clipping the bud from the stem;  removing large leaves from the bud; removing small leaves  from the bud. Alternatively to harvesting individual ripened  inflorescences or branches, whole plants can be harvested  and hung upside down in a drying room. The large leaves  are removed while the plant is hung and is followed by  a manicuring as described below. Drying or storage in  unclean barns and other such areas can lead to significant  microbial contamination. 
Post-harvest Handling 
Directly after harvesting, plant material must be processed  in a manner that protects it from pests and contaminants,  packaged in a manner that prevents damage, dried as soon  as possible to prevent chemical degradation, and protected  from excess exposure to light and humidity. 
Manicuring (trimming): After harvesting the inflorescences,  the leaves immediately subtending the buds as well as any  dead leaves or stems are trimmed or removed. Manicuring  is best accomplished when the inflorescences are fresh for  maximum preservation of the trichomes, which when fresh,  are pliable rather than brittle: dry trichomes break off eas ily. Manicuring can be accomplished by hand trimming,  machine trimming, or a combination of both. 
Budding branches (rather than the entire plant) are  harvested and the buds are removed manually and the  subtending leaves removed either by hand or with a trimming  machine. Machine trimming removes approximately 90% of  subtending leaves. If desired, the rest can be removed by  hand after the buds are fully dry. 
At UM, buds are carefully rubbed through different  sized screens (e.g., mesh of ~100 strands per square inch) to  separate small stems and seeds. Automated plant processing  machines can also be used to separate large stems from the  useable biomass. 
Manicuring is sometimes done by working over a  screen (mesh of ~100 strands per square inch) to allow for  collection of the trichomes that fall off in the manicuring  process, a technique also used in the processing of hops. The  loose trichomes (commonly known as “kief”), have very little  vegetation, contain high concentrations of cannabinoids,  and can be used in a variety of medicinal preparations.  The multi-fingered leaves surrounding the inflorescence  are often removed (commonly referred to as “trim”), have  more glands than larger lower leaves, and yield a higher  concentration of cannabinoids. This post-harvest processing  should be conducted in cool temperatures with good air  circulation to prevent molding. 
Drying 
When drying medicinal plants, great care must be taken in  the drying process (Chen and Mujumdar 2006), both for  preservation of putative medicinally relevant compounds 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 28 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 


16a. 

16b. 
16c.
Figure 16 Drying cannabis 
16a. Freshly harvested inflorescences drying on screens. 16b. Drying leaves to be used in tincture and edible preparations. 16c. Moldy leaves. 
16d. Hang-drying whole plants. 
Photographs courtesy of: WAMM, Santa Cruz, CA. 
16d. 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 29 
and to reduce the risk of molding. Drying is usually done by  either cutting the flowering tops from the plant or by hang ing the entire plant upside down in shaded areas. 
In the production of medicinal cannabis at UM, a  commercial tobacco drying barn (e.g., BulkTobac, Gas Fired Products, Inc., US), is used and material is dried at  40 ˚C for 12–15 h. Prior to drying, larger leaves and stems  are removed from the mature buds. The buds can be  dried whole or halved or quartered for quicker drying. The  material is fully dried when the central stem of the floral  cluster snaps, when bent, rather than remaining pliable  (Chandra et al. 2013). 
Varying drying practices are employed by state-approved  growing facilities. These practices are predominantly  designed to preserve maximum cannabinoid content and a  myriad of organoleptic characteristics. Numerous references  (e.g., Cervantes 2006; Clarke 1981; Rosenthal 2010; among  others) describe a multi-step process of curing and drying  in much the same way that tobacco leaves are prepared.  When drying by hanging, drying is complete when the  leaves next to the flowering tops are brittle and the central  stem snaps. This takes from 24–72 hours, depending on  temperature and humidity. The moisture content of such  plants is usually 8–13% (UNODC 2009). Many growers  use fans and or heaters to maintain some control over the  drying environment. Following are commonly employed  drying practices. 
Initial Drying: After the inflorescences are harvested and ini tially processed (trimmed), they are typically placed in single  layers in boxes, on breathable trays, or screens that allow for  steady airflow in a well-ventilated area. The initial drying is  done for approximately 3 days at a temperature of approxi mately 15–21 ˚C and a humidity of approximately 35% until  the inflorescences reach 25% of their original weight. Heaters  are typically required to maintain a consistent temperature,  fans are typically used to maintain a constant airflow, and  sometimes dehumidifiers are used to remove moisture. Buds  that are dried too quickly retain a greater amount of chloro phyll, which changes the qualitative organoleptic characteris tics of the material (Corral 2012, personal communication to  
AHP, unreferenced). Excess humidity encourages molding. Reports from state-approved markets indicate a preference  for all but the tiniest leaves to be completely removed.  However, some state-approved growers (e.g., in California)  consider it advantageous to keep the surrounding leaves intact  until the material is to be used. This creates a protective  covering that shields the trichomes from damage in storage  (Corral 2013, personal communication, unreferenced). 
Final Drying: After the initial drying process, the inflores cences are often placed in plastic bags or glass containers,  are initially closed and then opened every 12–24 h for 1–2  weeks until the material is completely dried. This allows the  moisture that remains inside the buds to evaporate. Drying is  sufficient when the small stem attached to the inflorescence  snaps easily. If the stem bends, too much moisture remains.  
When completely dried, the inflorescences contain approxi mately 10% moisture (Clarke 1981). If not properly dried,  mold can form over a several month period and is evident by  smell, graying of color, a slippery feel, and loss of firmness.  If dried completely in papsmither bags or on open trays, the  outside of the inflorescence turns brittle, while the inside  remains moist, increasing the potential to mold. 
When drying, plants should be protected from light and  should be minimally handled as the inflorescences bruise  easily during handling. Bruised tissue will turn dark green  or brown upon drying (Clarke 1981). At 45–55% humidity,  buds will dry gradually over 1–2 weeks depending on  inflorescence size. Humidity can be lowered to 20–40% to  hasten drying times. Proper drying maintains the terpenoids,  which give cannabis its characteristic organoleptic qualities.  Improper drying, such as at high temperatures, dramatically  alters the organoleptic profile. 
Over time, decarboxylation of the cannabinoid acids  occurs in dried flowers. The process is expedited by heat.  During this period, cannabinoid acids decarboxylate into  the psychoactive cannabinoids, and terpenoid isomerize to  create new polyterpenes with tastes and aromas different  from fresh floral clusters (Clarke 1981). 
According to the Dutch Office of Medicinal Cannabis  (OMC 2003), the moisture content of cannabis prior to  packaging must be between 5–10%. Dutch consumers have  reported a more pleasant flavor when the moisture content  of buds is approximately 8%. 
In the UK, in one investigation, plants were spread  evenly on the floor of a well-ventilated drying room at a  depth of approximately 15 cm. Gas burners maintained  a constant temperature of 40 ˚C to a moisture content of  approximately 15% (+/- 2%) and took 24 h. In another  experiment, plants were hung from wires in the same drying  room at 30, 40, and 50 ˚C. Mean times to achieve a finished  moisture content of 15% were approximately 36, 18, and 11  h, respectively. Alternatively, the same cultivars dried in a  glasshouse crop drying facility at 25 ˚C, but with different  ventilation, took 4.5–5 days to reach the same moisture  level. These latter prolonged drying conditions resulted in  fungal and bacterial growth. Additionally, plants initially  showing preliminary signs of fungal or bacterial damage  further deteriorated under these conditions (Potter 2009). 
Packaging 
In the Netherlands, packaging of medicinal materials is done  according to the European Pharmacopoeia Chapter 5.1.4  Microbiological Quality of Pharmaceutical Preparations  and Substances For Pharmaceutical Use. These guidelines  are specific to medicinal preparations used for inhala 
tion, specifically to prevent microbial exposure. To reduce  microbial loads, Netherlands cannabis may be subjected to  gamma irradiation (dose < 10 kGy). Use of irradiation for  ingredients in the US requires specific approval. Ungerleider  et al. (1982), demonstrated that 15-20 kGy killed bacterial  contaminants (Klebsiella, Enterobacter, and Enterococcus 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 30 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
spp.) in NIDA-sourced cannabis. In comparison, packaged  meat and poultry may be irradiated with 70 kGy.  Treatment with irradiation of other medicinal plants  (e.g., Digitalis, Ephedra, etc.) has been shown to negatively  effect constituent profiles (Samuelsson 1992) and in other  plant material to specifically lower terpenoid levels (e.g.,  cilantro, oranges) (Fan and Gates 2001; Fan and Sokarai  2002). Thus irradiation may similarly negatively affect the  general composition and specific terpenoid profile of can nabis. 
Storage 
Once cannabis is properly dried, degradation of the primary  cannabinoids is negligible, if protected from air and light  and the material can remain active for many years. The UM  produced material is stored in FDA approved polyethylene  bags placed in sealable fiber drums. If stored for short peri 
ods of time, a storage temperature of 18–20 °C is used; for  long-term storage a temperature of -20 °C is used. However,  some sources (eg., Clarke 1981) suggest that freezing dam ages trichomes. 
THC is especially sensitive to degradation by oxygen  and light (Chandra et al. 2013) and decarboxylation of  THCA to the active THC occurs in storage (Hazekamp  2007). Over time, the concentration of THC in cannabis  products decreases slowly, while the concentration of CBN  increases (Chandra et al. 2013; Ross and ElSohly 1999). In  one experiment, approximately 90% of the THC content  of dried plant material was still present after storage for 1  year at room temperature in the dark (Fairbairn et al. 1976).  According to the same experiment, storage temperatures of  up to 20 °C had little effect on stability of THC. Further  evidence of cannabinoid stability was provided in an analysis  of 3 dried samples from the turn of the 20th century,  which were stored at room temperature with some possible  exposure to light. The analysis detected trace amounts of  THC, THC acid (1.39-1.79%), traces of other cannabinoids,  and significant amounts of CBN (17.26–44.51%) and CBN  acid (7.19–10.95%) (Harvey 1990). 
A number of popular sources (e.g., Clarke 1981)  recommend against freezing, which can cause the trichomes  to become brittle and break off with handling. For the same  reason, handling of dried material should be kept to a  minimum. Additionally, according to Fairbairn et al. (1976),  excessive handling of the inflorescences causes them to  rupture exposing the cannabinoids to oxidation even when  protected from light. 
The stability of a 140-year-old ethanolic cannabis  extract has been investigated (Harvey 1985). Using gas  chromatography, it was shown that, while traces of THC,  CBD, and CBC were present, most of the THC had  decomposed to CBN. Additionally, cannabitriols were also  present.  
Natural Contaminants and Adulterants 
Due to its widespread cultivation, there is little concern  regarding adulteration of the plant itself. However, the large  economic potential and illicit aspect of cannabis has given  rise to a number of reported potentially hazardous natural  contaminants or artificial adulterants in crude cannabis and  cannabis preparations. 
Natural contaminants: Several plant species have morpho logical characteristics comparable to Cannabis species,  e.g., Hibiscus cannabinus (kenaf), Acer palmatum (Japanese  maple), Urtica cannabina (an Asian species of nettle),  Dizygotheca elegantissima (false aralia), Potentilla recta (sulphur cinquefoil, rough-fruited cinquefoil), and Datisca  cannabina (false hemp), leading to occasional contamina tion of cannabis internationally (UNODC 2009). However,  these plants can be readily differentiated from cannabis by  inspection of their macroscopic and microscopic charac teristics. More commonly, natural contaminants consist  of degradation products, microbial (fungi and bacteria)  contamination, and heavy metals. These contaminants are  usually introduced during cultivation and storage (McLaren  et al. 2008; McPartland 2002). 
Adulterants: Growth enhancers and pest control chemicals,  introduced during cultivation and storage, are possible risks  to the producer and the consumer (McPartland and Pruitt  1999). There are anecdotal reports of the use of banned  substances such as daminozide (Alar), the degradation prod 
uct of which is the highly toxic hydrazine. Cannabis can  also be contaminated for marketing purposes. This usually  entails adding substances, e.g., tiny glass beads, to increase  the weight of the cannabis product, or adding psychotropic  substances, e.g., tobacco, calamus (Acorus calamus), and  other cholinergic compounds, to enhance the efficacy of  low-quality cannabis or to alleviate the side effects of can nabis (McPartland et al. 2008; McPartland 2008). 
In the Netherlands, chalk and sand have been used  to make cannabis appear to be of higher quality, the sand  giving the appearance of trichomes. In the UK, similar  adulterations have been made by adding glass beads with  a similar diameter to trichome resin heads to cannabis  (Randerson 2007). In Germany, lead has intentionally  been added to street cannabis to increase its weight. Lead  is readily absorbed upon inhalation and this adulteration  resulted in lead intoxication in at least 29 users (Busse et al.  2008). Additionally, in the Netherlands, 2 chemical analogs  of sildenafil (Viagra) were found in cannabis samples. In the  UK, other contaminants including turpentine, tranquilizers,  boot polish, and henna, have been reported (Newcombe  2006). 
In recent years, various products laced with synthetic  cannabinoids have appeared on the market. These are  believed to mimic the effects of cannabis. These products  are known by various names (e.g., “Spice” and “K2”) and  might be sold as “incense” or “natural smoking blends”. 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 31 
Like cannabis, some of these synthetic cannabinoids are  Schedule 1 restricted substances. The Spice blend is  reported to contain synthetic cannabinoids with a mixture  of otherwise legal, safe, and non-psychotropic herbal dietary  supplement ingredients including: damiana (Turnera  diffusa), Chinese motherwort (Leonurus japonicus), and  water lily (Nymphaea spp.). According to the National  Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA 2012), those using some  of these various blends have been admitted to Poison  Control Centers and report “rapid heart rate, vomiting,  agitation, confusion, and hallucinations. Spice can also  raise blood pressure and cause reduced blood supply to the  heart (myocardial ischemia), and in a few cases it has been  associated with heart attacks. Regular users may experience  withdrawal and addiction symptoms.” 
Qualitative Differentiation 
Cannabis used for medicinal purposes should be as free  from foreign matter as practically possible (see Limit Tests).  Medicinal material should be free of molds and bacteria  that have a high likelihood of pathogenicity (e.g. Aspergillus  spp., E. coli (O157:H7). Visible mold should be absent,  material should be free of stems greater than 1.5 cm, only  subtending leaves should be present, material should be  free of metals to the degree allowed by a naturally occurring  growing substrate, and free of pesticides and fungicides that  could present a health hazard to the consumer. Microbial  standards should be adopted based on those required for  non-sterile pharmaceutical preparations for use by inhala tion (see European Pharmacopoeia 8.0: section 5.1.4).  Color should be consistent throughout each sample and  should not show signs of gray or black, which are indicators  of fungal infection. 
For medical users of cannabis, there is a balance  sought between organoleptic qualities (taste and aroma) and  medicinal effect, as well as a balance between THC- and  CBD-yielding cultivars. Many cultivators select, breed, and  process for these varying qualities. For medicinal purposes  an optimal ratio between total THC, ∆9-THC, and/or CBD  has not been definitively determined. Different health  conditions may respond differently to plants containing  different ratios of the 2 primary cannabinoids. For example,  evidence indicates that CBD is responsible for some of the  putative anxiolytic and anti-schizoprenic effects of the plant  (Mechoulam et al. 2002; Zuardi et al. 2002) while THC  has been associated with appetite stimulation (Dejesus et  al. 2007; Nelson et al. 1994). The process of trimming is  done both for yielding higher concentrations of THC and  for yielding more desirable, organoleptic qualities, since the  leaves possess a sharp and bitter organoleptic characteristic.  A better organoleptic profile may enhance compliance. 
Dispensaries should maintain strict quality control  practices to ensure the purity and quality of their material  by contracting for testing with independent labs that  apply independently verified testing methodologies and  transparent testing standards. Individual growers and care  givers producing medical cannabis for personal use should  
Documentation Guidelines (OMC 2003) 
a. Location of cultivation and the name of the supervising  cultivator. 
b. Details on crops previously grown at that location. c. Nature, origin and quantity of the herbal starting materials. d. Chemicals and other substances used during cultivation, such  as fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides. 
e. Standard cultivation conditions, if applicable. 
f. Particular circumstances which occurred during cultivation,  harvesting, and production that may affect the chemical  composition, such as plant diseases or temporary departure  from standard cultivation conditions, particularly during the  harvesting period 
g. Nature and quantity of the yield. 
h. Date or dates and time or times of day when harvesting occurred. i. Drying conditions. 
j. Measures for pest control.
employ good agricultural practices (GAPs) to the extent  possible in all aspects of growing, harvesting, drying, and  storage. 
Sustainability and Environmental Impact 
As all cannabis is derived from cultivated sources, there is  little risk of the plant becoming environmentally threatened  unless aggressive eradication programs are implemented  worldwide. However, without development, implementa 
tion, and enforcement of Good Agricultural Practices  (GAPs), both indoor and outdoor cannabis cultivation can  have significant negative environmental and social impacts  (Montford and Small 1999). Environmentally, the illegal  diversion of water, clear cutting of trees, dumping of chemi 
cals, misappropriation of state and federal lands, and dis ruption of sensitive ecosystems are associated with outdoor  cultivation, while high carbon emissions are associated with  indoor production. In North America, especially with crops  grown indoors, part of this environmental impact is driven  by the illegality of cannabis cultivation that requires growers  to hide crops. Others may choose indoor growing for greater  control over crops and higher yields. The high-energy  intensive processes associated with controlling all aspects  of the indoors growing environment has been estimated to  consume 1% of the national electricity use (Mills 2011).  Whether by regulation or choice, growers should apply  GAPs to cannabis cultivation. 
In addition to the impacts of cannabis cultivation,  the manufacture of butane extracts poses significant risks.  A number of explosions and fires associated with home  cannabis extract production have been reported, some that  have included injury. Industrial grade butane contains  
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 32 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
Table 3 Cannabis plant groups and typical Δ9-THC/CBD concentration and ratios 
THC CBD THC:CBD Ratio 
I Drug 0.5–15% 0.01–0.16% 50:1 II Intermediate 0.5–5% 0.9–7.3% 0.25/~ 2 III Fiber 0.05–0.70% 1.0–13.6% < 1:5 IV CBG < 0.05% < 0.5% - V Non-cannabinoid 0 0 - Source: Modified from Galal et al. (2009). Note: THCA-predominant strains can yield in excess of 25% Δ9-THC; specially selected CBDA clones can yield up to 20% CBD.
compounds that may not be desirable in finished products.  Extraction with CO2 (sub- or super-critical) is preferred by  some and is one environmentally safe extracting option. 
Documentation of Supply 
For cannabis that is to be used in medicinal preparations,  every aspect of cultivation, harvest, processing, and storage  should be documented to the fullest extent possible. Various  county and state ordinances require adherence to specific  regulations that differ between locations for trade of canna 
bis among growers, dispensaries, and collectives. The Dutch  OMC provides the following guidelines for documentation  as follows (also see inset page 32). 
Security (modified from OMC 2003) The buildings in which cannabis is cultivated, processed,  packaged and stored must be sufficiently secured, only  allowing authorized personnel access to the buildings.  Personnel involved in the production process of cannabis  must be authorized for that purpose by the employer. Waste  must be stored in such a way that the potential for theft is  minimized. 
Suppliers and Dispensaries 
Cannabis products supplied by dispensaries should be  as fully characterized as possible with traceability and a  verifiable chain of custody to type of material, whether  the plants were cultivated conventionally or organically, or  were indoor or outdoor cultivated. Procedures should be  implemented to ensure the absence of pesticides and raw  material and finished product should be characterized as to  its basic chemical profile (e.g., THC and/or CBD content).  This information should be made available to patients upon  request. Dispensary personnel should be appropriately  trained in how to process and handle cannabis to ensure  purity, maintain quality, and to morphologically identify  material. The cannabis committee of the American Herbal  Products Association (AHPA) has developed a set of draft  guidelines outlining recommended practices for dispensa ries and cultivators to follow (AHPA 2013a), and Americans  for Safe Access (ASA) has developed an industry certifica tion program for dispensaries and cultivators (ASA 2013). 
C o n s t i t u e n t s 
To date, more than 750 different constituents have been  identified in cannabis. The diversity of constituents encom passes numerous phytochemical classes, notably, canna binoids, and a host of other secondary metabolites. These  other compound classes include terpenoids, non-canna binoid phenols, nitrogenous compounds, as well as other  more common plant compounds, all of which are non psychotropic. Cannabinoids are the most studied and well known chemical constituents of cannabis. Of these, THC  has received the most attention, since it is the principal  psychoactive component of the plant. Cannabinoid acids  lack psychoactivity. Therapeutic activity is not limited to  cannabinoids. Emerging research suggests that other minor  compounds (e.g., terpenoids) may also play a role in the  complex pharmacology of this botanical, either directly or  through modulation of cannabinoid responses (reviewed  in Russo 2011) (see Table 6). Additionally, research on the  non-psychoactive acid cannabinoids has been limited due to  the overriding interest in decarboxylated THC (Mechoulam  2013, personal communication, unreferenced). 
Cannabinoids 
Cannabinoids (CBs) are a class of more than a hundred  terpenophenolic compounds, most commonly associated  with the pharmacological activity of cannabis. Several main  structures are distinguished (Tabel 6). The term “phytocan 
nabinoids” (Pate 1994) has been used to designate naturally  occurring cannabinoids in cannabis; however, the discovery  of compounds from other plants (e.g., Echinacea spp.) also  have CB-receptor activity and, thus, can be named “phy 
tocannabinoids.” A synonymous term “exocannabinoids”  is used to distinguish phytocannabinoids from endocan nabinoids, the endogenous ligands to cannabinoid recep tors. “Classical” and “non-classical” cannabinoids refer to  synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists (Makriyannis et al.  2005) and indicate the relative degree of structural similarity  with phytocannabinoids. 
Cannabinoids mainly exist in the plant as carboxylic  acids and are converted to neutral analogs by light and heat  while in storage (Veress et al. 1990) or when combusted.  The alkyl group at the third carbon atom (C-3) is considered  an important site in substrate-receptor interactions (Loewe  
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 33 
1944; Pertwee et al. 2010). This group is typically a pentyl— for example, in Δ9-THC, cannabigerol (CBG), cannabidiol  (CBD), and cannabinol (CBN)—but can also be a propyl,  in which case the compounds are named by attaching the  suffix -varin to the name of the pentylated analog, e.g.,  tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV), cannabidivarin (CBDV),  
cannabigerovarin (CBGV), and cannabivarin (CBV). Cannabis plants typically exhibit one of 3 main distinct ly different chemotypes based on the absolute and relative  concentrations of Δ9-THCA and CBDA (after conversion  from the respective acids). Small and Beckstead (1973)  refer to these as drug-type, intermediate type, and fiber-type  plants. Plants with more rare chemical profiles have been  identified, including those predominant in cannabigerol  (CBG) (de Meijer and Hammond 2005) or tetrahydrocan nabivarin (THCV), and those lacking any cannabinoids (de  Meijer et al. 2009), for a total of 5 general types (Table 3).  The cannabinoid profile is affected most by the plant’s  sex, genotype (de Meijer et al. 1992; 2003), and maturity  (Small et al. 1976), followed by environmental and other  factors, such as light intensity, light cycle (Valle et al. 1978),  temperature (Chandra et al. 2008), and fertilization (Bocsa  et al. 1997). Cannabinoids are produced in glandular  trichomes distributed across all epidermal surfaces of the  plant’s aerial parts in varying degrees. The distribution of  glandular trichomes and, hence, phytocannabinoids varies  widely, from the lowest concentrations found in stems to  increasing amounts in large leaves, subtending leaves of  the inflorescences, the inflorescences, and to the highest  concentrations found in female flower bracts. Cannabinoids are highly lipophilic, permeate cell  membranes, and have the ability to cross the blood-brain  barrier both when inhaled and ingested. 
Following is a review of major and minor cannabinoids  primarily associated with the psychoactive and pharmaco logical effects of cannabis. Not all compounds will be found  in every plant sample, and the ratios of the compounds will  vary. THC is generally the most abundant cannabinoid in  contemporary horticulture of cannabis, due to the focus  of growers on high THC yielding strains, specifically for  enhanced psychoactive effects. 
Cannabinoid Acids 
Cannabinoids occur in living plants mainly in carboxyl ated form. Cannabigerolic acid (CBGA), derived from  olivetolic acid and geranyl pyrophosphate (Fellermeier  and Zenk 1998), is the precursor of all other major can nabinoid acids—THCA, CBDA, and cannabichromic acid  (CBCA)—as well as their analogs and biogenic derivatives  (Yamauchi et al. 1968). Two THC acids are present in can nabis and differ in the position of the carboxyl group THC  acid-A (Korte et al. 1965) and THC acid-B (Mechoulam et  al. 1969). Both are non-psychotropic and their pharmacolo gy is almost unknown (Mechoulam 2013, personal commu nication, unreferenced). In fresh, unheated plant material,  virtually no neutral (non-carboxylated) compounds have  
been found (Verhoeckx et al. 2006), despite cannabinoid  acids being readily thermo- and photolabile (Hazekamp  2007; Johnson et al. 1984). The THCA-Δ9-THC ratio in  leaves and flowers of the female plants has been reported to  be from 2:1 (these days rarely) to 20:1 and higher, depend 
ing on the variety (strain) tested (e.g., Brenneisen 1984; Pitts  et al. 1992, among others). Higher THCA-Δ9-THC ratios are  more typical and are often found even in dried, one-year-old  plant material (Wurzer and Dixon 2013, personal com 
munication, unreferenced). Heating for 5 minutes (min) at  200–210 °C has been reported to be effective for conver sion to occur, but slow decarboxylation occurs also at room  temperature (Brenneisen 1984). An aqueous decoction of  cannabis (simmered for 15 min) retained a large THCA-Δ9- THC ratio (Hazekamp 2007). 
Cannabinoid acids, including THCA, are devoid of  psychotropic effects (Burstein 1999; Dewey 1986). Medical  users report health benefits from modes of cannabis con sumption that do not use combustion or high temperatures  (certain kinds of foods, capsules, infusions, juices), thus pre serving most of the cannabinoids in their acid forms. Little  specific pharmacological investigation of THCA has been  published to date, but immunomodulatory activity of THCA  has been reported (Verhoeckx et al. 2006). 
Major Cannabinoids 
Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) Type Phytocannabinoids ∆9-THC was isolated in 1964 (Gaoni and Mechoulam  1964a), and additional THCs were identified by 1980 (e.g.,  reviewed in Suurkuusk 2010, among others), followed by  almost 3 decades before a series of 8 Δ9-THCA terpenoid  esters were isolated from high-potency cannabis (Ahmed  et al. 2008b). THCA, commonly the primary cannabinoid  of this group existing in the plant, is synthesized from  CBGA by THCA synthase, which is abundantly present in  glandular trichomes. Δ9-THC is a product of THCA decar boxylation, usually formed via degradation (such as during  storage) or heating (vaporization or combustion). THCA is  typically the predominant cannabinoid in cannabis strains  that exhibit psychoactivity, but it also occurs in low levels in  fiber-type plants (Table 3). 
THC has a high affinity for cannabinoid receptors of  both type 1 (CB1) and type 2 (CB2), and is thought to behave  as their partial agonist, similar to the endocannabinoid anan damide (Howlett et al. 2010; Pertwee 2008). The primary  natural isomer, (−)-trans-∆9-THC, displays a higher potency  compared to the other isomers (e.g., (+)-trans-) or enantio 
mers (e.g., (3R,4R)-∆1-THC) (Mechoulam et al. 1990) and  is used preferentially in clinical trials. THC has been used as  an antiemetic in chemotherapy-associated nausea and eme sis; as an appetite promoter, especially for AIDS and cancer  patients who are prone to severe weight loss due to anorexia  and anorexia-cachexia, respectively; as an analgesic, e.g., for  cancer, damaged nerves, migraine, spinal cord injury, post 
operative, dental, and phantom limb pain; for treatment  and symptom management of neurological disorders such as 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 34 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
multiple sclerosis (Fox and Zajicek 2002; Rog et al. 2005).  Its utility for treating glaucoma is limited by the high dosage  needed to lower intraocular pressure, and its short duration  of action in this condition (Buys and Rafuse 2010). 
Tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV) is the propyl homo log of ∆9-THC and usually occurs in cannabis in minor  amounts, although THCV-rich strains (up to about 16%  dry weight in selected inflorescences) have been developed  (de Meijer 2013, personal communication to AHP, unrefer enced). This cannabinoid is a CB1 neutral antagonist at low  doses (Gill 1971; Thomas et al. 2005) and agonist at both  CB1 and CB2 receptors at high doses (Bolognini et al. 2010;  Thomas et al. 2005). Anticonvulsant, anti-inflammatory,  and analgesic properties have been reported for THCV  (Bolognini et al. 2010; Hill et al. 2010). A recent study  reported antioxidant and potential neuroprotective effects  of THCV in an experimental Parkinson’s disease model in  mice, suggesting utility in the amelioration of Parkinsonian  symptoms, in part via activation of CB2 (Garcia et al. 2011). 
Cannabidiol (CBD) Type Phytocannabinoids 
Cannabidiol (CBD) and cannabidiolic acid (CBDA) are  the main non-psychotropic cannabinoids in cannabis and  are the most abundant cannabinoids in European hemp.  Cannabidiol was isolated in 1940 (Adams et al. 1940b),  with its structure determined in later studies (Mechoulam  and Shvo 1963; Mechoulam and Gaoni 1967; Petrzilka  et al. 1969). Cannabidiolic acid, cannabigerolic acid, and  cannabinolic acid were first isolated by Mechoulam and  Gaoni (1965). To date, 8 CBD-type phytocannabinoids have  been identified (Shoyama et al. 1972a; Sirikantaramas et al.  2007). 
Cannabidiol lacks the cognitive and psychoactive prop erties of THC and displays a very low affinity for cannabi noid receptors (Thomas et al. 2007). Research has focused  on identifying CB1- and CB2-independent mechanisms  of CBD action. Cannabidiol is known to be an agonist at  serotonin (5-HT1A) receptors (Mishima et al. 2005; Russo  et al. 2005) and transient receptor potential vanilloid type  1 (TRPV1) receptors (Bisogno et al. 2001; McHugh et al.  2010). Cannabidiol can also enhance adenosine receptor  signaling by inhibiting adenosine inactivation, suggest ing a potential therapeutic role in pain and inflammation  (Carrier et al. 2006). Some of the pharmacological actions  of CBD include anticonvulsive, anti-inflammatory, anti oxidant, antipsychotic, hypnotic, and sedative (at very high  doses). The antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties  account for the neuroprotective actions of CBD (Scuderi  et al. 2009), which could potentially be utilized for the  treatment and symptom relief of a number of neurological  disorders, e.g., epilepsy and seizures (Hofmann and Frazier  2013; Jones et al. 2010), psychosis (Zuardi et al. 2006),  anxiety (Bergamaschi et al. 2011), movement disorders (e.g.,  Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, and amyotrophic  lateral sclerosis) (de Lago and Fernandez 2007; Iuvone et al.  2009), Alzheimer’s disease (Martin-Moreno et al. 2011), and  multiple sclerosis (Lakhan and Rowland 2009). Cannabidiol 
has demonstrated an exceptional tolerability in humans,  making it a potential candidate for clinical application or as  a lead compound for the development of cannabimimetic  drugs (Mechoulam and Hanus 2002). 
Cannabigerol (CBG) Type Phytocannabinoids Cannabigerolic acid (CBGA) is a direct precursor to THCA,  CBDA, and cannabichromenic acid (CBCA) (Gaoni and  Mechoulam 1964b, 1966; Taura et al. 1995a, 1995b, 1996).  It is typically present in cannabis only in minute amounts,  though in some cannabis this class of cannabinoids may  be dominant (de Meijer et al. 1992), and cannabis plants  that produce CBG as the primary cannabinoid have been  cultivated (de Meijer and Hammond 2005). To date,  16 CBG-type cannabis constituents have been identified  (DeBacker et al. 2009; ElSohly and Slade 2005; Turner et  al. 1980b), including cannabigivarin (CBGV). CBGV is the  biosynthetic precursor of THCV and is reputedly found in  higher concentration in some feral accessions from India  (Hillig and Mahlberg 2004; Vollner et al. 1969). While there  is little research to date on CBGV, there are indications of  anti-inflammatory action associated with THCV (Tubaro et  al. 2010) and activation of CB2 receptors on mesenchymal  cells (Izzo et al. 2009). 
CBG-type cannabinoids are non-psychoactive canna binoids that generally act as weak ligands at both CB1 and  CB2 receptors (Costa 2007; Fisar 2009; Eisenstein et al.  2007; Gaoni and Mechoulam 1964b; Pollastro et al. 2011).  Cannabigerol is a GABA uptake inhibitor with more potent  effects than THC or CBD (Banerjee et al. 1975). It is a  potent alpha2-adrenocorticotropic receptor agonist (Cascio  et al. 2010), a potent antagonist of transient receptor poten tial cation channel subfamily M member 8 (TRPM8) (De  Petrocellis et al. 2008), and has been shown to have some  uptake-inhibitory activity at 5-HT1A receptors (Banerjee et  al. 1975; Rock et al. 2010). This latter action is responsible  for countering the anti-emetic effects of CBD (Rock et al.  2010). Additionally, this cannabinoid has demonstrated  antimicrobial activity (Appendino et al. 2008), inhibited  proliferation of keratinocytes (Wilkinson and Williamson  2007) and cancer cells (Ligresti et al. 2006), and was shown  to have greater analgesic activity than THC (Cascio et al.  2010; Evans 1991). These actions suggest that CBG may  have a therapeutic potential, e.g., as an antidepressant or for  the treatment of psoriasis (Wilkinson and Williamson 2007).  The presence of CBG has also been found in Helichrysum  umbraculigerum (Woelkart et al. 2008). 
Minor Cannabinoids 
Δ8-Tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ8-THC) Type Phytocannabinoids This group has only 2 compounds, namely, (–)-Δ8-THC  and (–)-Δ8-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid A ((–)-Δ8-THCA  A). Δ8-THC is stable in air, and is less psychotropic than  Δ9-THC, making it a viable option as a therapeutic alterna tive to Δ9-THC. At low doses, Δ8-THC (0.001 mg/kg po)  is capable of inducing appetite stimulation without psy 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 35 
chotropic effects such as alterations in cognitive function  (Avraham et al. 2004). 
Cannabielsoin (CBE) Type Phytocannabinoids To date, 5 compounds of this type have been identified,  including cannabielsoin (Bercht et al. 1973), cannabielsoic  acids (CBEA) A and B (Shani and Mechoulam 1970, 1974),  and 2 additional isomers (Hartsel et al. 1983). Cannabielsoic  acids and CBE are not always found in natural sources and  can be obtained by photooxidation or pyrolysis of natu rally occurring CBDAs and CBDs (Kueppers et al. 1973).  Rather, these compounds are found in processed cannabis  products such as hashish and may be artifacts of other  naturally occurring phytocannabinoids (Bercht et al. 1973;  Grote and Spiteller 1978a; Kueppers et al. 1973; Shani and  Mechoulam 1974). Cannabielsoin is found in mammals as  a metabolite of CBD (Yamamoto et al. 1988). 
Cannabitriol (CBT) Type Phytocannabinoids 
(–)-Cannabitriol was isolated from cannabis grown in Japan  (Obata and Ishikawa 1966). Other related cannabitriols  (e.g., 6α,7,10α-trihydroxytetrahydrocannabinol, 9,10-epoxy cannabitriol) were identified in pollen grains (Ross et al.  2005). Cannabidiolate, 9-O-CBT, was isolated from hashish  (Von Spulak et al. 1968). 
Cannabichromene (CBC) Type Phytocannabinoids In the 1970s, CBC was reported to be the second most abun dant cannabinoid in some strains of cannabis growing in the  United States (Holley et al. 1975), but this may be attributed  to past difficulties distinguishing CBC from CBD. To date,  a total of 8 CBC-type phytocannabinoids have been identi fied (Radwan et al. 2009). Usually CBC is present in minor  amounts due to its biosynthetic enzyme being produced by  a recessive gene (de Meijer and Hammond 2005), although  high CBC plants have been selectively bred. This com pound is also present in a higher concentration in juvenile  cannabis plants, and may be concentrated into an “enriched  trichome product” (Potter 2009). More recently, cannabi noids of this type were isolated from high-potency cannabis  (Radwan et al. 2009) (concentrations not reported). 
Cannabichromene interacts with TRPV channels, hav ing a strong affinity for TRPV1, but has poor affinity for the  CB1 receptor (Booker et al. 2009; DeLong et al. 2011; De  Petrocellis et al. 2011). The compound is known to produce  anti-nociceptive and anti-inflammatory effects in rodents  (Davis and Hatoum 1983; Turner and ElSohly 1981; Wirth  et al. 1980). Three cannabinoids of this type have been  reported to have antimicrobial and moderate anti-leish 
manial activities, while lacking cytotoxicity against African  green monkey kidney fibroblast cell line Vero (Radwan et  al. 2009). 
Table 4 Content ranges of major and minor cannabinoids in  cannabis and their degradation products 
Compound % dry weight 
Δ9-THC 0.1–25 
CBD 0.1–7.98 
CBN 0.0–1.6 
THCV 0.0–1.36 
CBG 0.03–1.15 
CBC 0.0–0.65 
Δ8-THC 0.0–0.1 
Source: Modified from McPartland and Russo (2001) with additional data  from Fischedick et al. (2010); Fournier et al. (1987); Pitts et al. (1992); Small  (1979); and Veszki et al. (1980).
Degradation Products and Artifacts 
Cannabinol (CBN) Type Phytocannabinoids 
Cannabinoids of this type are fully aromatized derivatives  of THC, and, although they have been isolated from dif ferent cannabis extracts (Bercht et al. 1973; Harvey 1976;  Mechoulam and Gaoni 1965; Wood et al. 1896), they are  believed to be artifacts (Bowd et al. 1975) obtained by non enzymatic oxidation of THC. Some of the reported levels in  dry plant material are summarized in Table 4. There are 10  known CBN-type cannabinoids (Adams et al. 1940a; Cahn  1932; Ghosh et al. 1940). The concentration of CBN in  cannabis products (marijuana, hashish, and hash oil) has  been reported to increase during storage, while the THC  concentration decreases, but at a different rate (Ross and  ElSohly 1999). 
Cannabicyclol (CBL) Type Phytocannabinoids This group has 3 known compounds: cannabicyclol  (Claussen et al. 1968; Korte and Sieper 1964a, 1964b),  cannabicyclolic acid A (CBLA) (Shoyama et al. 1972b),  and cannabicyclovarin (CBLV) (Claussen et al. 1968; Vree  et al. 1972). The photochemical conversion of CBC into  CBL has been demonstrated (Crombie et al. 1968). Larger  amounts of CBLA were observed in cannabis harvested ear lier, during the vegetative phase, and stored for prolonged  periods of time, compared with that harvested later, in the  reproductive phase (Shoyama et al. 1968). These observa tions prompted the conclusion that CBL and CBLA are  not genuine cannabinoids but artifacts produced by natural  irradiation of CBC and CBCA during storage (Shoyama et  al. 1972b). 
Cannabinodiol (CBND) Type Phytocannabinoids Cannabinoids of the CBND type are the fully aromatized  derivatives of CBDs (Lousberg et al. 1977; Van Ginneken  et al. 1972). 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 36 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
Table 5 Content of major terpenoids in the volatile oil freshly  extracted from cannabis inflorescences, as determined by GC-MS  by various research groups
Compound Content, % oil 
Monoterpenoids 
α-Pinene 1.11–31.0 
β-Pinene 0.6–7.95 
β-Myrcene 8.23–67.11 
Limonene 0.2–16.38 
Terpinolene 0.12-23.8 
cis-Ocimene 0.04–10.28 
Linalool 0.09–2.8 
Sesquiterpenoids 
β-Caryophyllene 1.33–28.02 
Humulene 0.28–12.61 
β-Eudesmol 0.02-1.56 
Caryophyllene oxide 0.3–11.3 
trans-Nerolidol 0.09–1.72 
Source: Compiled from Bertoli et al. (2010); Mediavilla and  Steinemann (1997); and Ross and ElSohly (1996). 
Benzoquinone Type and Other Phytocannabinoids Two geranyl-n-pentyl-1,4-benzoquinones were isolated from  high-potency cannabis (Radwan et al. 2008b, 2009).  Cannabicitran was first synthesized (Crombie and Ponsford  1971) and subsequently isolated from Lebanese hashish  (Bercht and Paris 1974). Its structure was described by  Bercht et al. (1974). The isolation and identification of  cannabichromanone, dehydrocannabifuran, cannabifuran,  and 10-oxo-Δ6a(10a)-THC from hashish (Friedrich-Fiechtl and  Spiteller 1975) was followed by the isolation of cannabichro manone-C3 (Grote and Spiteller 1978a) and cannabicouma ronone (Grote and Spiteller 1978b). cis-Δ9-THC was found  in samples of confiscated cannabis (Smith and Kempfert  1977). Cannabiripsol was isolated from South African-grown  cannabis (Boeren et al. 1979). Cannabis grown in Thailand  (Meao strain) provided (±)-cis-Δ7-isotetrahydrocannabivarin  (Shoyama et al. 1981). Cannabiglendol was isolated from  an Indian cannabis variety grown in Mississippi (Turner et  al. 1981). A polyhydroxylated cannabinoid, cannabitetrol,  was was also isolated from natural sources and identified  (ElSohly et al. 1984). The GC-MS analysis of hash oil  (Morita and Ando 1984) led to the identification of trans- (1R,3R,6R)-Δ7-iso-THCV and trans-(1R,3R,6R)-Δ7-iso-THC.  Three cannabichromanone derivatives (Ahmed et al. 2008a)  and cannabicoumarononic acid A (Radwan et al. 2009)  were isolated from high-potency cannabis. 
Terpenoids 
The essential oil (volatile oil) of cannabis is a blend of terpe noids, a term that encompasses terpenes and modified ter penes (where the methyl group has been moved or removed,  or oxygen atoms added). Approximately 200 terpenoids have  been extracted from cannabis, primarily monoterpenoids  (C10H16 template) and sesquiterpenoids (C15H24 template),  as well as di-, and triterpenoids, megastigmanes, and apoca rotenoids. No terpenoids are unique to cannabis, but various  types of cannabis biosynthesize unique terpenoid profiles  (Brenneisen and ElSohly 1988; Hillig 2004; Mediavilla and  Steinemann 1997). The qualitative and quantitative profile  of terpenoids may vary between different batches of the same  seed source (Fischedick et al. 2010). 
Ester conjugates of terpenoid alcohols with cannabi noid acids have been reported as minor constituents in can nabis extracts (Ahmed et al. 2008b). The biological profile  of these compounds is currently unknown, despite their  potential to act as pro-drugs of pre-cannabinoids. 
Terepenoids are primarily respnsible for the aroma of  cannabis, while cannabinoids, despite their terpenoid ori gins, are odorless. 
Terpenoids produce a wide range of biological activity,  possibly including modulation of the effects of THC via their  own anxiolytic, sedative, analgesic, antinociceptive, and  anti-depressant effects (reviewed in McPartland and Pruitt  1999; Russo 2011). Other actions of terpenoids include anti 
inflammatory, acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibition, anti oxidant, antibiotic, and anti-mutagenic (Maffei et al. 2011). Terpenoids, together with cannabinoids, alkanes, and  other compounds, are synthesized inside glandular tri chomes via a common precursor, geranyl pyrophosphate.  Yields of cannabis essential oil obtained from fresh plants  through steam distillation range from 0.05–0.29% v/w and  may represent 10% of trichome content, varying greatly with  growing, drying, and harvest conditions (Hazekamp 2008– 2009; McPartland and Mediavilla 2001; Potter 2009). Ross  and ElSohly (1996) demonstrated the ephemeral nature of  terpenoids in stored flowering tops. Freshly-collected mate rial yielded 0.29% v/w essential oil; 1-week-old material air dried at room temperature and stored in a paper bag yielded  0.20%, a loss of 31%; 1-month-old cannabis yielded 0.16%,  a loss of 45%; 3-month-old cannabis yielded 0.13%, a loss  of 55%. 
Monoterpenoids 
Monoterpenoids typically predominates in cannabis, com prising 47.9–92.48% of essential oil extracted from fresh  plant material (Mediavilla and Steinemann 1997; Ross  and ElSohly 1996 (see Table 5). β-myrcene usually domi nates the monoterpenoid fraction in all types of cannabis.  Limonene or terpinolene predominate in some drug-type  plants (Fischedick et al. 2010, terpinolene and α-pinene  predominate in some European fiber-type plants (Bertoli et  al. 2010), and α-inene predominates in some Chinese fiber type plants (Hillig 2004). Other common monoterpenoids  
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 37 
Table 6 Structure and activity of primary phytocannabinoids
Compound Putative Medicinal Action Primary psychotropic cannabinoid 
OH 
O 
Activates PPAR-y and TRPA1 at nano- and micromolar concentrations, respectively  (Pertwee 2008). 
Analgesic via CB1 and CB2 agonism (active at ~20–40 nM) (Rahn and Hohmann 2009). Antiemetic (Haney et al. 2007; Hollister 1971; Machado et al. 2008). Anti-inflammatory, antioxidant (Hampson et al. 1998). 
∆9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (∆9-THC) 
OH 
HO 
Cannabidiol (CBD) 
OH 
O 
Cannabichromene (CBC) 
Antipruritic, cholestatic jaundice (Neff et al. 2002). 
Benefits duodenal ulcers (Douthwaite 1947). 
Bronchodilatory (Williams et al. 1976). 
Muscle relaxant (Kavia et al. 2010). 
Reduces Alzheimer’s symptoms (Eubanks et al. 2006; Volicer et al. 1997). Non-psychotropic cannabinoid 
Anandamide (AEA) reuptake inhibitor (De Petrocellis et al. 2011). 
Analgesic (Davis and Hatoum 1983). 
Anticonvulsant (Jones et al. 2010). 
Antidepressant in rodents (Deyo and Musty 2003). 
Anti-emetic (5HT1A agonist; 5 mg/kg ip) (Rock et al. 2010). 
Antifungal (ElSohly et al. 1982). 
Anti-inflammatory (Booz 2011). 
Antagonizes effects of THC in humans (Pertwee 2008). 
Antioxidant (Hampson et al. 1998). 
Anxiolytic via 5HT1A agonism (Campos and Guimaraes 2008; Resstel et al. 2009; Russo  et al. 2005). 
Decreases sebum/sebocytes proliferation (Biro et al. 2009). 
Effective against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) (Appendino et  al. 2008). 
Increases adenosine A2A signaling (Carrier et al. 2006). 
Pro-apoptotic against breast cancer cell lines (Ligresti et al. 2006). Treatment of addiction (Xi et al. 2010). 
Treatment of psychosis (Russo et al. 2007). 
Non-psychotropic cannabinoid 
Analgesic (weak) (Turner et al. 1980b). 
Anandamide reuptake inhibitor (weak) (De Petrocellis et al. 2008; Ligresti et al. 2006). Anti-inflammatory (Davis and Hatoum 1983). 
Antimicrobial (Turner and ElSohly 1981). 
TRPA1 agonist (De Petrocellis et al. 2008; Ligresti et al. 2006). 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 38 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
Table 6 (continued) Structure and activity of primary phytocannabinoids
Compound Putative Medicinal Action 
OH 
Cannabigerol (CBG) 
OH 
O 
Non-psychotropic cannabinoid 
Analgesic via α-2 adrenergic blockade (Cascio et al. 2010). 
Anandamide reuptake inhibitor (low micromolar range) agonist (De Petrocellis et al. 
 2008; Ligresti et al. 2006). 
HO 
Anti-fungal (ElSohly et al. 1982). 
Anti-inflammatory, anti-hyperalgesic (Bolognini et al. 2010). 
Effective against MRSA (Appendino et al. 2008). 
GABA uptake inhibitor (Banerjee et al. 1975). 
Reduces keratinocytes proliferation in psoriasis (Wilkinson and Williamson 2007). 
5HT1A antagonist; counters antiemetic effects of CBD (Rock et al. 2010). 
TRPM8 antagonist (De Petrocellis et al. 2011). 
TRPV1, TRPA1, and cannabinoid agonist (De Petrocellis et al. 2008; Ligresti et al. 2006). 
Non-psychotropic cannabinoid 
Antagonizes ∆9-THC at low doses (< 3 mg/kg); acts as CB1 agonist at higher doses (10 
 mg/kg) in mice (Pertwee et al. 2007, 2008). 
Anticonvulsant (Hill et al. 2010). 
Reduced food intake in mice (Cawthorne et al. 2007). 
Improved glucose tolerance, insulin sensitivity, and insulin signalling in vivo (Wargent  
∆9-Tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV) 
OH 
HO 
Cannabidivarin (CBDV) 
OH 
O 
Cannabinol (CBN) 
β-Caryophyllene 
Source: Modified from Izzo et al. (2009); Russo (2011). β−Caryophyllene 
et al. 2013). 
Non-psychotropic cannabinoid 
Anticonvulsant in vitro and in vivo (Hill et al. 2010, 2012). 
Non-psychotropic cannabinoid; minor by-product of ∆9-THC oxidation Decreases breast cancer resistant protein (Holland et al. 2008). Effective against MRSA (Appendino et al. 2008). 
Reduces keratinocytes proliferation in psoriasis (Wilkinson and Williamson 2007). Sedative (Musty et al. 1976). 
TRPV2 agonist for burns (Qin et al. 2008). 
Non-psychotropic sesquiterpene of the essential oil 
Common compound of many aromatic plants. Anti-inflammatory, antibiotic, antiox-  dant, anticarcinogenic, and local anaesthetic activities (Leandro et al. 2012). 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 39 
in cannabis include β-pinene, cis-ocimene, trans-ocimene,  and linalool. 
β-Myrcene is recognized to have sedative, muscle relaxant (do Vale et al. 2002), anti-inflammatory, and  analgesic activities (Lorenzetti et al. 1991; Rao et al. 1990).  Limonene, a precursor to other monoterpenoids and fairly  ubiquitous in nature (Noma and Asakawa 2010), is highly  bioavailable and has been suggested to be anxiolytic (do  Vale et al. 2002), anticarcinogenic (Elson et al. 1997),  and radical-scavenging (Malhotra et al. 2009), while also  used to treat gastro-esophageal reflux and gallstones (Sun  2007). α-Pinene is one of the most widely encountered  terpenoids in nature, being especially common to conifer 
ous trees (Chalchat et al. 1985; Persson et al. 1996). This  terpenoid is reported to have anti-inflammatory (Gil et al.  1989), bronchodilatory (Falk et al. 1990), and antibiotic  (anti-MRSA) (Kose et al. 2010) activities, and is an AChE  inhibitor that may be of use as a memory aid (Perry et al.  2000). Terpinolene has been reported to be a sedative (Ito  and Ito 2013) and antispasmodic (Riyazi et al. 2007) agent.  Linalool, common to lavender (Lavandula spp.) and cori ander (Coriandrum sativum), has anxiolytic (Souto-Maior  et al. 2011), local anaesthetic, analgesic (Peana et al. 2004),  sedative, and anticonvulsant (Karlaganis 2002) properties,  and is used as a topical treatment for burns (Gattefosse  1993). Pulegone is a minor terpenoid in cannabis (Turner  et al. 1980b), and is also found in rosemary (Rosmarinus  officinalis), and possesses sedative (Miyazawa et al. 1997)  and anti-pyretic (Ortiz de Urbina et al. 1989) properties.  Turner et al. (1980b) report p-cymene in cannabis; it has  anti-microbial properties (Kisko and Roller 2005) and is able  to effect AChE inhibition (Perry et al. 1996).  
As with cannabis flavonoids, many of these proposed  uses are extrapolated from the same compounds in other  medicinal plants, with their relevance to cannabis effects  equally unknown. 
Monoterpenoids are exceptionally volatile and par ticularly susceptible to loss during drying and storage. As  demonstrated by Ross and ElSohly (1996), the relative  percentage of monoterpenoids in the essential oil fraction  gradually reduced from 92.48 to 62.02% after cannabis  was dried and stored at room temperature in closed paper  bags for 3 months. Specifically, for example, the content  of β-myrcene gradually decreased from 67.11% to 32.88%  of the oil, while linalool increased from 2.80% to 5.07%,  and α- and β-pinenes and limonene remained seemingly  unaffected (no statistical analysis was reported in the study).  However, none of the major (> 0.1% of the total) com pounds decreased to unquantifiable levels. 
Sesquiterpenoids 
Sesquiterpenoids comprise 6.84%–47.5% of the essential  oil extracted from fresh plant material (Mediavilla and  Steinemann 1997; Ross and ElSohly 1996). The primary  sesquiterpenoid in cannabis is usually β-caryophyllene. This  sesquiterpenoid surpasses β-myrcene as the overall predomi 
nate terpenoid in some fiber-type plants (Bertoli et al. 2010;  Mediavilla and Steinemann 1997). Caryophyllene oxide,  reportedly the volatile compound sensed by drug detec tion dogs (Stahl and Kunde 1973), is common to all can nabis strains. Other common sesquiterpenoids in cannabis  include α-humulene (ie., α-caryophyllene), trans-nerolidol,  α-guaine, elemene, and isomers of farnesene and bergamo tene (Bertoli et al. 2010; Fischedick et al. 2010; Hillig 2004;  
Mediavilla and Steinemann 1997; Ross and Elsohly 1996). β-Caryophyllene is a dominant constituent in black  pepper (Piper nigrum) and clove (Syzygium aromaticum).  It reportedly has anti-inflammatory (Basile et al. 1988), gas trocytoprotective (Tambe et al. 1996), analgesic (Ghelardini  et al. 2001), and anti-malarial properties (Campbell et al.  1997). This terpenoid was demonstrated to be a selective  CB2 receptor agonist (Gertsch et al. 2008). β-caryophyllene  and α-humulene, which along with monoterpenoids myrce ne and β-farnesene, predominates in hops (Humulus lupu lus), imparts its cannabis-like odor. 
The relative levels of sesquiterpenoids may increase  after drying and in storage, due to loss of the more vola tile monoterpenoids. Prolonged storage of the material  characterized by Ross and ElSohly (1996) resulted in the  sesquiterpenoids content of 35.63%, compared with 6.84%  in the oil extracted from the fresh plant. The content of  β-caryophyllene increased from 1.33% to 5.45% after 3  months of storage of dried plant material, compared with  fresh plant (Ross and ElSohly 1996). 
Flavonoids 
To date, more than 29 flavonoids have been identified  in cannabis (Clark and Bohm 1979; ElSohly and Slade  2005; Ross et al. 2005; Vanhoenacker et al. 2002). can nabis flavonoids belong mainly to 2 classes: flavones (e.g.,  vitexin, apigenin, isovitexin, luteolin, and orientin and  their O-glucosides) and 3-hydroxyflavones, or flavonols  (e.g., kaempferol and quercetin). Clark (1978) examined  9 cannabis accessions grown in a common garden, and a  canonical analysis of flavonoid profiles separated drug-type  plants from fiber-type plants (see also Clark and Bohm  1979). Flavones act as phytoestrogens; Sauer et al. (1983)  report that a cannabis extract and cannabis smoke conden sate showed affinity for estrogen receptors in a heterologous  competition assay. The displacement of [3H]estradiol was  not due to THC, rather apigenin was implicated.  
Cannabis also biosynthesizes 3 unique prenylated agly cone flavanones, cannflavins A, B, and C, (Crombie et al.  1980; Radwan et al. 2008a). The cannflavins have only been  reported in studies of drug-type plants (Barrett et al. 1985;  Crombie et al. 1980; Radwan et al. 2008a;) and appear to  be absent in fiber-type plants (Vanhoenacker et al. 2002).  Cannflavins are potent inhibitors of cyclooxygenase enzymes  and prostaglandin E2 production (Barrett et al. 1985). The  cannflavins are structurally related to 8-prenylnaringenin, a  potent phytoestrogen from hops. The pharmacology of can 
nabis flavonoids was reviewed in McPartland and Russo  (2001), who propose many potential uses, predominantly 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 40 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
extrapolating from research on numerous other medicinal  plants. Whether these uses have clinical relevance to can nabis is unknown.  
Other Constituents 
To date, 527 compounds have been isolated from cannabis  (Appendino et al. 2011; ElSohly and Slade 2005). These  other compounds occurring in cannabis include carbohy drates (monosaccharides, disaccharides, polysaccharides,  sugar alcohols, cyclitols, and amino sugars), amino acids,  amines (e.g., piperidine, hordenine, ammonia), non-can nabinoid phenols (spiro-indan-type, dihydrostilbene-type,  cannabidihydrophenanthrene derivatives, simple phenols,  simple phenolic glycosides, and phenol methyl esters),  simple alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, acids, esters, lactones,  steroids (phytosterols and brassinosteroides), vitamins,  xanthones, coumarins, and pigments. Two unique sper midine-type C21-alkaloids, (+)-cannabisativine (Turner  et al. 1976) and anhydrocannabisativine (ElSohly et al.  1978), have been found in cannabis and are reviewed in  Mechoulam (1988). 
Among the 527 compunds, some predominate in  achenes or roots, and are marginally relevant to flowering  tops. These include amides, fatty acids and their esters  (oxylipins), quaternary bases (e.g., choline, trigonelline),  and proteins. 
Pharmacological effects have been established for  many of these compounds. Notably, β-sitosterol, a phy tosterol ubiquitous in the plant kingdom and found in  cannabis (Mole and Turner 1974) and cannabis smoke  (Adams and Jones 1975; Foote and Jones 1974), was shown  to reduce topical inflammation and chronic edema in skin  models (Gomes et al. 2008). A group of unique stilben 
oids, canniprene and its spiranized (cannabispirans) and  quinoid (denbinobin) derivatives (Turner et al. 1980b),  were shown to have anti-inflmmatory, antibacterial, and  antifungal activities (Flores-Sanchez and Verpoorte 2008;  Pagani et al. 2011). Whether these actions are of clinical  relevance remains to be determined. 
A n a l y t i c a l 
There are a number of analytes of interest in cannabis.  Historically and presently, the quantitation of THC has  been the focus of greatest interest. In recent decades, other  cannabinoids have gained interest (e.g., CBD, THCV) due  to their therapeutic benefits, as have terpenoids. Gas chro 
matography (GC) has been the primary methodological  technique used for federal regulatory and toxicology purpos es (e.g., ElSohly et al. 2000; Mehmedic et al. 2010, among  others). Generally, there are a host of non-standardized,  non-validated methods across several analytical platforms  being used that give a wide range of total or THC values  with unknown reliability. Thus, there is a need for standard 
ized and validated testing methodologies. 
THC is present only at very low levels in fresh or dry  plant material. This compound is derived by decarboxyl ation of the naturally occurring non-psychoactive THCA  during storage (small amounts) and heating (e.g., more  complete decarboxylation when smoked) (Sirikantaramas  et al. 2004; Yamauchi et al. 1967). In absence of a specific  legislative directive regarding THC quantification, it is most  common to quantify “total THC” (THCA + THC), as this  best represents the potential activity associated with THC.  Total THC content more closely reflects the amount of  THC potentially yielded when smoked. Because of this,  many legal systems consider total THC content as the pri mary quantitative value desired.  
Decarboxylation from THCA to total THC can be  achieved prior to and during analysis. Decarboxylation prior  to analysis can be accomplished by placing a plant sample  that has been extracted into a solvent into a heating block  at 150 ˚C in an open glass vial. When the extraction solvent  has evaporated, decarboxylation can occur within 5 min;  however, individual analysts need to validate this process in  their own laboratories (UNODC 2009). 
During GC analysis, a sample elutes through a column  within an oven, which decarboxylates most of the THCA  into THC. Therefore, GC typically measures total THC.  However, if the goal of the analysis is to quantify both THCA  and THC by GC, prior derivatization is required (UNODC  2009). Additionally, varied degrees of decarboxylation can  occur during injection in some GC systems, and high injec tion temperatures in the liner may cause a decomposition  of THC. Decarboxylation may be partial, complete, or  inconsistent depending on the temperature and geometry of  the injector. Therefore, if decarboxylation is not performed  prior to analysis, the specific gas chromatograph system and  analysis conditions must be validated to ensure that com plete decarboxylation of THCA is attained without undue  decomposition of THC (Dussy et al. 2005; UNODC 2009). 
High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)  is also applicable for the quantification of cannabinoids.  HPLC allows for the quantitation of the naturally occur ring acid compounds, as well as the neutral forms, as both  acids and neutrals are detected, and the peaks for both com pounds can be added together for “total THC” or individual  cannabinoids can be quantified. HPLC is therefore the  optimal testing methodology for quantifying the authentic  plant compounds prior to decarboxylation. 
Thin-layer chromatography (TLC) is predominantly  of value for the identification of cannabis. Currently, there  are no validated TLC or high performance TLC (HPTLC)  methods for the quantitation of THC that give results equal  to those obtained from LC or GC analyses, although, some  commercial laboratories are attempting to do so. 
Some US states that have legalized the use of cannabis  for either medicinal or non-medical use have proposed  mandates requiring quantitative analysis. Both growers and  dispensers are making claims of varying quantitative values  of THC, other cannabinoids, and terpenoids in herbal can 
nabis and associated products. However, as cannabinoids  are closely related in structure and molecular weight, 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 41 
adequate chromatographic separation of these molecules  is requisite to accurately report quantitative values. For.  example, Debruyne et al. (1994) compared TLC and HPLC  to their gold standard: capillary column GC-MS. Analysis  of a single cannabis specimen produced different quantita 
tive peak sizes using these three methods. With GC-MS,  THC=CBD>CBN; with HPLC, CBN>THC=CBD; with  TLC, CBN>THC=CBD. 
With appropriate sample preparation, analytical meth ods can be applied to a variety of cannabis preparations  (foods or topicals), extractions (tinctures or oils), or con centrates; however method extensions must be performed  for various matrices. To aid laboratories in the analysis of  cannabis, the cannabis committee of the American Herbal  Products Association (AHPA) developed a set of draft guide lines outlining recommended practices for labs to follow  (AHPA 2013b), and Americans for Safe Access (ASA) has  developed a laboratory certification program (ASA PFC  2013). 
Lastly, and of significant importance in the analysis  of cannabis, is to employ a formal sampling protocol (e.g.  [OMC] BMC 2010; WHO 1998 among others) to assure  the sample being tested is representative of an entire batch.  This is critical, as dosing decisions either for medical or  non-medical use can be based on claimed potencies, and  there can be significant variation in constituent concentra tion between plants and even within a single plant itself. For  cannabis, the sampling program being applied may differ  between products being tested (e.g., raw material versus  extracts). For crude cannabis, specific guidance is provided  by the Bureau voor Medicinale Cannabis (BMC) mono graph of the Netherlands ([OMC] BMC 2010). 
Thin-Layer Chromatography Characterization  of Cannabis and Its Major Cannabinoids  The following method was developed by the University  of Mississippi and provides a characteristic fingerprint  that can be used for the identification of cannabis and its  primary cannabinoids as well as distinguish between THC dominant, CBD-dominant, and fiber types. Two different  reagents for visualization can be used. Both identify the pri mary cannabinoids, and either of them can be used for pur poses of basic identification of crude cannabis plant mate rial. Additionally, some different bands are visible with the 2  reagents. Therefore, examination using the 2 reagents allows  for a more complete visualization of cannabis compounds. 
Sample Preparation 
Weigh approximately 100 mg of dried powdered cannabis,  and extract by maceration with sonication in 10 mL dichlo romethane for 1 h. Filter the extract and evaporate the  solution under nitrogen. Redissolve the residue in methnol,  
adjusting the concentration to 10 mg/mL. 
Decarboxylation of Cannabinoid Acids (optional) To decarboxylate cannabinoid acids (e.g., to convert THCA  to THC), heat the dried plant extract at 120 ˚C for 2 h* and  adjust the concentration to 10mg/mL as indicated above. 
* Alternatively, heating at 210 °C for 15 min can facilitate sufficient decar boxylation.
Table 7 Rf values for cannabinoid standards 
Phytocannabinoid Rf 
CBC 0.21 
Δ9-THC 0.26 
CBN 0.29 
CBG 0.33 
CBD 0.40 
THCV 0.42 
Δ9-THCA 0.61 
CBDA 0.77 
Note: Due to its relatively high concentration in drug type samples, Δ9-THC  can overlap with CBN. CBN is a degradation compound of Δ9-THC. 
Standards Preparations 
Cannabinoid standards are dissolved in methanol at a con centration of 1 mg/mL. 
Note: All cannabinoid standards utilized in the development of this method  were isolated at the University of Mississippi. There is limited availability of  commercially prepared cannabinoid standards. 
Standards Solution Stability 
CBD, CBG, and CBN are stable in methanol, both at room  temperature and with freezing. THC, THCV, and CBC metha nolic solutions are stable only when frozen and acid compounds  are only stable in a freezer. Due to their instability, acid com pounds should be prepared cool and stored and shipped frozen. 
Reagent Preparation 
Fast Blue reagent: Dissolve 0.5 g Fast Blue B salt (MP  Biochemicals, LLS) in 100 mL distilled water. Vanillin/H2SO4: Dissolve 6 g vanillin in 90 mL ethanol  (95%). Add 10 mL of 98% H2SO4. This reagent is relatively  unstable and is best to use fresh each time. 
Chromatographic Conditions 
Stationary Phase: 
C18 (UV 254) TLC plates 150 µm, 10 cm × 10 cm (Sorbent  Technologies). 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 42 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
Figure 17a TLC chromatogram of cannabis and its primary can nabinoids (Fast Blue reagent; white light) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Discussion of chromatograms 
Observations (Fast Blue reagent; white light) 
17a) In the cannabis THC drug type, the most prominent  


	



0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
visible bands are those for Δ9-THC, and THCA with 4  primary bands in the upper Rf region, including CBDA. In  the intermediate type, the most prominent visible bands are  those for Δ9-THC, CBD, THCA, and CBDA with additional  bands showing for CBC in the lower Rf; unknown bands  in the middle Rf; and 3 bands in the upper Rf, including  CBDA. In the cannabis fiber type, the pattern of banding  is very similar to the intermediate type, but reflects a much  lower concentration of THCA and a similar concentration  of CBD and CBDA. When subjected to decarboxylation,  a degradation of a number of the original cannabinoid  acids occurs, leaving characteristic bands for Δ9-THC and  CBD and a faint band for CBC. THCA-dominant types  are most often notably lacking in CBD, while fiber types  yield very low concentrations of Δ9-THC and relatively high  
Figure 17b TLC chromatogram of cannabis and its primary can nabinoids (Vanillin/H2SO4 reagent; white light) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
concentrations of CBDA. Thus, these 3 clearly delineated  types can be readily distinguished. However, other materials,  which are highly crossed, may not be readily distinguished. 


	



0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
Figure 17c TLC chromatogram of cannabis and its primary can nabinoids (UV 254 nm) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 


	



0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1
17b) All standards (Lanes 1, 2, 6-11) appear as purple bands  with varying intensities. In the cannabis drug type (Lane 3),  the most prominent visible bands are those for THCA (Rf 0.61) and Δ9-THC (Rf 0.26). In the intermediate type (Lane  4), the most prominent visible bands are those for CBDA,  THCA, CBD, and Δ9-THC. In the cannabis fiber type (Lane  5), the strongest bands are seen for CBDA and CBD. In  the decarboxylated intermediate cannabis type (Lane 12),  the only visible bands are for Δ9-THC and CBD due to  decarboxylation of the cannabinoid acids by heating. 
17c) All cannabinoids are of varying intensities. THCA (Lane  2), CBDA (Lane 6), CBC (Lane 8), and CBN (Lane 10)  are more intense than the others. In the cannabis drug type  (Lane 3), a strong band is seen at the position of THCA. In the  intermediate type (Lane 4), the most prominent visible bands  are those for THCA and CBDA, while in the cannabis fiber  type (Lane 5), the band for CBDA is most prominent. In the  decarboxylated intermediate cannabis type (Lane 12), a band  corresponding to CBN occurs in the lower third Rf (0.3). 
Figure 17a-c lane assignments  
Lane 1: Δ9-THC 
Lane 2: THCA 
Lane 3: THC-type cannabis 
Lane 4: Intermediate-type cannabis 
Lane 5: Fiber-type cannabis 
Lane 6: CBDA 
Lane 7: CBD 
Lane 8: CBC 
Lane 9: CBG 
Lane 10: CBN 
Lane 11: THCV 
Lane 12: Cannabis intermediate type decarboxylated (UM) 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 43 
Mobile Phase: 
75:25 (v:v) methanol/water with 0.1% glacial acetic acid. 
Sample Application 
Apply 5 µL of the sample preparations and 2 µL of the stan dards preparations on the plate as 5 mm bands 2 mm apart  from each other. The application position should be 8 mm  from the lower edge of the plate and at least 15 mm from the  left and right edges of the plate. For visualization using both  reagents, separate plates should be prepared. 
Development 
Line a flat bottom chamber (14 cm x 14 cm x 8 cm) with  a filter paper or chromatography paper. Add a sufficient  amount (~25 mL) of the Mobile Phase solution to ensure  that the filter paper is covered to a a height of at least 5 mm,  and let saturate for 15 min. Measure and mark on the plate  the developing distance 60 mm from the application posi tion. Introduce the plate into the chamber, and allow the  developing solvent to reach the mark. Remove the plate and  dry for 2 min at 70 °C in an oven. 
Detection 
Visualize the plates under UV 254 nm, then spray one set  of the plates with the Fast Blue reagent and the other set of  plates with the vanillin/H2SO4 reagent, followed by visualiza tion under white light. For basic identification of the primary  cannabinoids, either reagent can be used. 
Results 
See Table 7 and refer to the chromatograms provided  (Figure 17a–c). 
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography  (HPLC) for the Determination of Major  Phytocannabinoids in Cannabis 
This HPLC method was adapted from Swift et al. (2013) and  can be used for quantitation of THCA-A, Δ9-THC, CBDA,  CBD, CBGA, CBG, and CBN in cannabis preparations.  The method was adapted from an earlier method developed  by DeBacker et al. (2009), which also quantified Δ8-THC.  The original method of DeBacker et al. (2009) was validated  for cannabis raw material and fully validated using total  error approach in accordance with ISO17025 and the guide lines of the French Society of Pharmaceutical Sciences and  Techniques (SFSTP). This modified and optimized method  of Swift et al. (2013) was subjected to validation for selectiv 
ity, linearity, accuracy, precision, and recovery according to  the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidance for  bioanalytical method validation (FDA 2001). 
With appropriate modifications in sample preparations,  the same chromatography can be used for the analysis of  other cannabis materials (i.e. concentrates, extracts, foods).  
However, the robustness of this chromatography when  applied to various matrices requires further validation (e.g.,  recovery, spiking experiments). 
Sample Preparation 
Crude Cannabis  
Test samples are dried for 24 h in a 35 ˚C forced ventila tion oven. Dried samples are ground to a fine powder. 200  mg of the sample is weighed in a glass vial and extracted  with 10 mL of a mixture of methanol/chloroform (v/v: 9:1)  by sonication for 30 min. The extract is filtered into an  amber vial and diluted with methanol/chloroform solution  (v/v: 9:1) to a concentration of 1:10. A 100-µL aliquot of  the dilution is evaporated under a gentle stream of nitrogen  and re-dissolved in 100 µL of a mixture of water/acetoni trile (v/v: 5/5). 
Note: For analysis, the UNODC (2009) recommends that crude cannabis  be dried to a finished moisture content of 8–13%, pulverized, and sieved  through a 1 mm sieve. The UNODC provides the following sample prepa rations for different matrices. This specific method was not validated with  these matrices, but these guidelines may be useful to the analyst. 
Sample Preparation of Cannabis Resin 
Grate into small pieces to a particle size of approximately  1 mm, or if sticky, cool with liquid nitrogen, pulverize, and  sieve through a 1 mm sieve (UNODC 2009). Dissolve 50  mg in 10 mL of a mixture of methanol/ chloroform (v/v: 9:1)  by sonication for 30 min. 
Sample Preparation of Cannabis Oil 
For HPLC analysis, cannabis oil requires no prior prepara tion. Dissolve 50 mg in 10 mL of a mixture of methanol/  chloroform (v/v: 9:1) by sonication for 30 min. 
Standards Preparation 
The availability of cannabinoid reference materials varies  due to federal legal restrictions. A variety of cannabinoids  are sold pre-diluted at concentrations of one mg/mL or less.  Stock solutions for the standard curves are prepared across  a broad range of concentrations to account for variable  concentrations of cannabinoids. For accuracy, it is necessary  to include at least 4 points in the standard curve. Standards  should be run with every sample set and a relative bias not  greater than 10% should be achieved. Limits of quantitation  (LOQ) should be established using a calibration curve cov ering a range from 0.5 µg/mL to 100 µg/mL. 
Internal Standard  
Diazepam (50 mg/L). Diazepam is a schedule IV controlled  substance. Use of an alternative internal control, such as  methyl or propylparaben (e.g., 30 mg/L), should be validat ed for acceptable recovery and chromatographic separation.
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 44 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
Standard Stability 
CBD, CBG, and CBN are stable in methanol, both at room  temperature and with freezing. Δ9-THC, THCV, and CBC  methanolic solutions are stable only when frozen and acid  compounds are only stable in a freezer. Due to their instabil 
ity, acid compounds should be prepared cool and stored and  shipped frozen. 
Linearity Range 
Compound r2 LOQ (%) LOD (%) THCA 0.9969 0.05 0.025 Δ9-THC 0.9940 0.05 0.025 CBDA 0.9939 0.05 0.05 
CBD 0.9951 0.075 0.075 CBGA 0.9948 0.05 0.05 CBG 0.9959 0.15 0.1 CBN 0.9917 0.05 0.025 r2=coeeficient detrmination: LOQ=Limit of Quantitation: LOD=Limit of Detection Note: This method was not validated for quantitation of Δ8-THC. 
Storage of Reference Standards 
For long-term storage of reference standards, store at -20 C  protected from light and air. When properly stored, refer ence standards are stable for up to 12 months. 
Chromatographic Conditions 
Apparatus: 
Validation was performed on a Shimadzu ADVP module  (Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a SIL-10 autoinjector with  sample cooler and LC-10 in-line vacuum degassing solvent  delivery unit. 
Column: 
Waters X-Bridge C18 (4.6 mm x 150 mm, 3.5 µm) reverse phase column (Waters, Australia) coupled with a 1-mm  Opti-Guard C18 pre-column (Optimize Technologies,  Alpha Resources, Thornleigh, Australia). 
Column Temperature: 
30 °C. 
Injection Volume: 
30 µL. 
Mobile Phase: 
A. 50 mM ammonium formate (adjusted to pH 3.75 with  10% acetonitrile) 
B. 90% acetonitrile.  
Time (min) B in A (%) 
0 70 
15 90 
30 90 
31 70 
40 70 
Flow Rate: 
1 mL/min. 
Detection (diode array detector): 
Full spectra monitoring from 190-370 nm is recommended.  Non-acidic cannabinoids are typically detected at approxi mately 228 nm and acidic cannabinoids at approximately  270 nm. Note: The validation was performed using a photo diode array detector. For routine use, a standard UV detector  is suitable. 
Run Time: 
30 min. 
Post-run Time: 
6 min. 
Note: CBD and CBG peaks may slightly overlap if present in high concentra tions (> 10%). 
Quantitation 
Inject each standard preparation and generate a standard  curve based on the peak area vs. concentration, as a ratio of  standard to internal standard. 
Cannabinoid contents in the sample are quantified using  the linear equation based on least squares regression for each  cannabinoid compound: (y = mx + c) 
where: 
x = concentration of the individual cannabinoid in the  sample (µg/mL); 
y = peak area of the invidivual cannabinoid; c = calculated y-intercept of the calibration curve; m = calculated slope of the calibration curve. 
Using the concentration from the equation (y = mx +  c), total content (CCBXT) in the sample can be calculated as  a sum of the concentrations of the neutral (CCBX) and the  acidic (CCBXA) components. A conversion factor of 0.877 is  used for adjustment of the molar masses of THCA-A and  CBDA; a conversion factor of 0.878 is used for CBGA; both  after decarboxylation. These conversion factors may not  apply for other cannabinoids: 
CCBXT = CCBX + CCBXA x 0.877 
The individual cannabinoid content in the material is  then calculated according to the following equation:

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 45 
Figure 18 Representative HPLC chromatograms of cannabinoid standards (A at 11 µg/mL) and cannabis raw material (B)
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 46 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
where: 
WCBX(T) = (total) cannabinoid content in the material (%  weight); 
CCBX(T) = (total) cannabinoid content in the sample (µg/  mL); 
Vsample = sample volume (mL); 
D = dilution factor; 
msample = sample mass (g). 
Calibration Range 
Linear from 2 µg/mL to 100 µg/mL. Extrapolations from  this curve should not be made; however, cannabinoid  concentrations in samples greater than 100 μg/mL can be  appropriately diluted, or the curve can be extended out to  1000 μg/mL (with 7 or more points in the curve) to ensure  the reading is within the calibration range. 
Gas Chromatography with Flame Ionization  Detection (GC-FID) for the Quantitation of  Phytocannabinoids 
The following GC-FID method is used for the quantitation  of the major phytocannabinoids of confiscated cannabis  material submitted to the University of Mississippi by the  DEA and other United States law enforcement agencies  as part of NIDA’s Marijuana Potency Monitoring Program  (ElSohly et al. 2000; Mehmedic et al. 2010). Due to the  high temperature of the GC injector port, in situ decarboxyl ation of the acidic cannabinoids occurs upon injection. This  method, therefore, quantifies total cannabinoids (acidic and  neutral) simultaneously. If quantitation of free (neutral) and  acidic compounds is required for a specific cannabinoid,  a non-destructive method, e.g., HPLC, or derivatization,  e.g., silylation or formation of the alkylboronates, should be  employed and validated. 
Sample Preparation 
Crude cannabis and hashish: To 100 mg of dried, powdered  cannabis material with seeds and stems removed, add 3 mL  of the internal standard solution (see below on the prepara tion instructions). Macerate for 1 hour at room temperature  Sonicate for 5 min. Filter the extract into GC vials, and cap  the vials. 
Hash oil: To 100 mg of hash oil, add 4 mL of hash oil extrac tion solution (see below). Macerate for a minimum of 2 h at  room temperature. Sonicate for 5 min. Add 20 mL of abso lute ethanol, and sonicate again for 5 min. Filter the extract  into GC vials, and cap the vials. 
Internal Standard Preparation (use for extraction of can nabis and hashish) 
Dissolve 100 mg of 4-androstene-3,17-dione in 100 mL of  1:9 v/v chloroform/methanol mixture. 
Hash Oil Extraction Solution: Dissolve 50 mg of 4-andros tene-3,17-dione in 50 mL of absolute ethanol. Chromatographic Conditions 
Column: 
DB-1MS: 15 m x 0.25 mm id x 0.25 μm film (J&W  Scientific, Inc, US [Agilent Technologies]). 
Mobile Phase: 
Helium. 
Column\Head Pressure: 
14 psi (1.0 mL/min). 
Traps: 
Moisture and oxygen traps for the purification of the helium. Injection Volume: 
1 μL. 
Injection Mode: 
Split (can be selected based on the sensitivity needed and  analytical goal). 
Injector Temperature: 
240 °C. 
Temperature Program (Column Control): 
170 °C (hold 1 min) to 250 °C (hold 3 min) at 10 °C/min,  12 min total run time. 
Detection Temperature: 
260 °C. 
Make-up Gas: 
Helium (UHP): 20 psi, 20 mL/min (nitrogen may be  used as an alternative make-up gas). 
Combustion Gases: 
Hydrogen (UHP): 30 psi, 30 mL/min and compressed  air (suitably purified) at 30 psi, 400 mL/min. 
Split Flow: 
50 mL/min. 
Split Ratio: 
50:1. 
Septum Purge: 
5 mL/min (will vary on different systems). 
Detection (FID): 
Relative retention times are provided in Table 8. Calculations: 
Cannabinoid potency is calculated as shown in the fol lowing equation: 
WC = (IC × mis) / (Iis × msample) × 100%
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 47 
Figure 19 Characteristic gas chromatography (GC) chromatogram of cannabis with an internal standard 
where: 
WC = relative cannabinoid content of the material, %  weight; 
Table 8 Relative retention times of phytocannabinoids and  4-androstene-3,17-dione, as observed using GC-FID 
Time (min) 
IC = integrated area of the cannabinoid peak from  GC-FID chromatogram; 
Cannabinoid 
Without internal  standard 
With internal  standard 
Iis = integrated area of the peak of the internal standard  from GC-FID chromatogram; 
mis = mass of internal standard 
THCV 6.772 6.769 
CBD 7.649 7.645 
CBC 7.786 7.786 
Δ9-THC 8.420 8.410 
CBG 8.869 8.869 
CBN 8.930 8.931 
4-androstene-3,17- 
dione – 9.172
Limit Tests 
Limits that are applicable to cannabis include those that are  generally applied to herbal materials, such as tolerance levels  of microbial and fungal contamination, content of certain  metals, as well as limits of solvent and pesticide residues.  With exception to loss on drying and moisture content of  dry material, the following limits are based on general recom 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 48 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
mendations for botanical ingredients established by various  national and international bodies. Tests can be performed  according to standard pharmacopoeial instructions (e.g.,  European Pharmacopoeia, United States Pharmacopeia,  among others). 
Foreign Organic Matter (crude cannabis material): Not  more than 5.0% of stems 3 mm or more in diameter; not  more than 2.0% of other foreign matter. 
Total Ash (crude cannabis material): Not more than 20.0%.  
Acid-insoluble Ash (crude cannabis material): Not more  than 4.0%. 
Loss on Drying (crude cannabis material): Not more than  10.0% of its weight, determined on 1.000 g of the powdered  drug by drying in an oven at 105 ºC for 2 h (BMC 2010). 
Moisture content of dry material (crude cannabis after  packaging): Not more than 15% (BMC 2010). 
Microbial and Fungal Limits 
The presence of microbes is typical for all natural products.  Unless carefully cultivated, illegal supplies may not meet  the prescribed specifications. Conversely, reports in which a  causal association between microbial exposure through can 
nabis use and infections has been established (e.g., Carod  Artal 2003) appear to be rare considering the prevalence of  use and exposure. 
Tolerance limits for microbial and fungal contamina tion in cannabis and its products should be consistent with  applicable state, federal, and international regulations,  
whenever applicable. Recommended tolerance limits for  cannabis products are provided in Table 9 and were based  on a review of national and international recommendations  for botanical products as well as discussion with a variety of  stakeholders (e.g., Washington State). Additional guidance  for botanical products is provided in national and interna tional compendia based on oral consumption of finished  botanical products. Additionally, more restrictive limits may  be adopted for medical use of cannabis, most notably when  used by immune compromised individuals. Microbes such  as Aspergillus spp., for example, can be transmitted through  inhalation and are of specific concern in those with specific  medical conditions (e.g. chronic granulamatous disease and  cystic fibrosis) and when employing specific medical treat ments (e.g., immunosuppressive therapies). Reducing total  microbial risk may require specific microbial reduction  treatment to the greatest level possible without compromis ing the putative medicinal activity. Appropriate methods for  testing microbial loads can be found in the Bacteriological  Analytical Manual (FDA 2013a). 
It is important to note that microbial and fungal values  do not typically represent pass or fail criteria. Rather they  are recommended levels when plants are produced under  normal circumstances and growing conditions. Individual  herbs, such as mints (Mentha spp.), which have a high con 
centration of trichomes, are prone to higher levels of molds  than crops with fewer trichomes. As cannabis also possesses  high concentrations of trichomes, this may be a factor and  recommended limits may require adjustment over time.  Higher levels of molds can also occur in seasons of heavy  rain without undue damage to the crop and may justify a  material exceeding the proposed limits as long as there is no  visible damage to the plant and other qualitative specifica tions are met. Limits must also be appropriately applied to  the various preparations being made. Typical microbial and  fungal limits may not be relavant to materials that are to  
Table 9 Microbial and fungal limits recommended for orally consumed botanical products in the US (CFU/g) 
Total viable  
aerobic bacteria 
Total yeast  and mold 
Total  
coliforms 
Bile-tolerant  
gram-negative bacteria 
E. coli (pathogenic strains) and  Salmonella spp. 
Unprocessed  materials* 
Processed  
materials* 
CO2 and  
solvent-based  extracts 
105 104 103 103Not detected in 1 g  105 104 103 103Not detected in 1 g 
104 103 102 102 Not detected in 1 g 
* Unprocessed materials include minimally processed crude cannabis preparations such as inflorescences, accumulated resin glands (kief), and  compressed resin gland (hashish). Processed materials include various solid or liquid infused edible preparation, oils, topical preperations, and water processed resin glands (“bubble hash”). Significant microbial contamination can occur during post-harvesting hadling.
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 49 
Table 10 Pesticides commonly used in cannabis cultivation 
Pesticide Use Residue Analytical Methods (RAM) Environmental  Protection Agency (EPA)1 or Literature2 
Abamectin  
(Avermectins B1a and  B1b) 
Insecticide/acaricide LC-FLD1; LC-MS/MS2 
Acequinocyl Insecticide/acaricide LC/MS/MS1 Bifenazate Acaricide LC1; LC-MS/MS2 
Bifenthrin 
(synthetic pyrethroid) 
Insecticide GC-ECD1; GC-MS/MS2 
Chlormequat chloride Plant growth regulator (PGR) IC, LC-MS/MS2 
Cyfluthrin (synthetic  pyrethroid) 
Insecticide LC2 (WHO 2004); GC-MS/MS2 
Daminozide (Alar) Plant growth regulator (PGR) UV Spectroscopy1; LC-MS/MS2 Etoxazole Acaricide GC-MS(/MS)1 
Fenoxycarb Insecticide LC/UV1; LC-MS/MS2 
Imazalil Fungicide GC-ECD1; LC-MS/MS2 
Imidacloprid Insecticide LC-MS/MS2 
Myclobutanil Fungicide GC-ECD; GC-NPD1; GC-MS/MS)2; LC-MS/MS2 Paclobutrazol Plant growth regulator (PGR); fungicide LC-MS/MS2 
Pyrethrins* Insecticide GC-ECD1 
Spinosad Insecticide LC-MS/MS; immunoassay1 
Spiromesifen Insecticide GC-MS1; LC-MS/MS2 
Spirotetramat Insecticide LC/LC-MS/MS2 
Trifloxystrobin Fungicide GC-NPD1; GC-MS/MS2; LC-MS/MS2 ECD = Electron capture detector; FLD = Fluorescence detector; GC = Gas chromatography; LC = Liquid chromatography; IR = Infrared spectros copy; MS = Mass spectrometry; NMR = Nuclear magnetic resonance; NPD = Nitrogen phosphorous detector. * Natural pyrethrins are tolerance exempt; synthetic pyrethrins are not. 
be subjected to processing, such as infusing, decocting, or  extracting with heat, alcohol, or other processes that intro duce a microbial reduction step prior to consumption. 
Metal Limits 
When grown in contaminated soil, cannabis accumulates  heavy metals to the extent that it has been proposed as a  candidate for bioremediation of toxic waste sites (Shi and  Cai 2009). Siegel et al. (1988) measured 440 ng mercury per  gram of cannabis in Hawaii, whose volcanic soil contains  naturally high levels of mercury. Siegel notes that mercury  is absorbed 10 times more efficiently by the lungs than by  the gut. He calculated that smoking 100 g of volcanic  cannabis per week could lead to mercury poisoning. The  American Herbal Products Association (AHPA) provides  manufacturers of herbal products with general recommen dations for maximum heavy metals levels in herbal products,  based on the daily product intake amount (Table 11). The  most appropriate method for quantification of metals in  medicinal products is an inductively coupled plasma-mass  spectrometry (ICP-MS) method of the US Food and Drug  Administration (FDA), which analyzes arsenic, cadmium,  
chromium, lead, and mercury (FDA 2011). The cannabis  monograph of the Netherlands BMC (2010) considers the  risk of metal contamination of cannabis grown under con trolled conditions to be low. 
Pesticide Limits 
In the US, pesticides are regulated by the Environmental  Protection Agency (EPA), which registers or licenses pesti cides for use in the United States, and by individual states  (usually, by that state’s department of agriculture), which  may regulate pesticides more stringently than EPA. Pesticide  tolerances are approved on an individual or crop group basis,  so that the approval of a pesticide for use on one commodity  does not confer the approval of its use on another. Where no  limits are specifically established for a specific crop or class  of crops, the limit is zero (0), generally considered as < 0.01  ppm or 10 ppb according to analytical methods set forth in  the Pesticide Analytical Manual (PAM; available from the  US Food and Drug Administration) (FDA 2013b).  
To date, there are no pesticides specifically approved  for use on cannabis in North America on the federal level.  However, some pesticides with tolerance exempt ingredi-
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 50 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
Table 11 Metal limits recommended for herbal products in the US Contaminating metal Limit, µg/daily dose Inorganic arsenic 10 
Cadmium 4.1 
Lead 6 
Methyl mercury 2.0 
Source: AHPA (2008).
ents have broad use sites that could allow for their use on  cannabis. Additionally, some states, (e.g., Massachusetts,  Washington, and Colorado) are formulating guidelines for  pesticide use in cannabis cultivation, whose ingredients are  approved in that state for organic production, or are listed  by the Organic Materials Review Institute (OMRI). Use of  unapproved pesticides in those states that allow for OMRI listed or exempt pesticides represents a public safety license  violation and can result in the cancellation of a cannabis  producer’s license. State allowance for pesticide use on can 
nabis may be in conflict with federal pesticide regulations. 
Presence and Testing of Pesticides in Cannabis Specialty agricultural supply stores for the cannabis industry,  have proliferated across the US, many of which are catego rized as “hydroponic”. This aspect of the industry lacks any  meaningful regulation or guidance. Products found in such  stores have been reported to contain banned substances,  and often fail to accurately disclose ingredients or provide  adequate information for proper use. For example, the  California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA)  in 2011 issued cease and desist orders against the sale of  a number of popular cannabis cultivation products due to  their inclusion of a number of banned plant growth regula tors including daminozide (Alar) and paclobutrazol (CDFA  2011). A number of these products are labeled as “organic”  though they may not be compliant under the National  Organics Program of the United States Department of  Agriculture (USDA). 
The use of such agents on cannabis crops is widespread.  Daley et al. (2013) compiled a list of 148 pesticide products  used in cannabis cultivation, based on a survey of California  growers. Insecticides and miticides are often used on canna 
bis grown indoors, while fungicides are used on both indoor  and outdoor crops. Inappropriate use of insecticides, miti cides, and fungicides (such as improper product selection,  application rate, concentration, and/or timing) can lead to  pests becoming resistant and/or medical users being exposed  to inappropriate residue levels. 
Appropriate testing methodologies, as recommended  by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA Residue  Analytical Methods [RAM]) or those of the Food and Drug  Administration (FDA Pesticide Analytical Manual [PAM]),  should be employed when appropriate. However, as these  tests were developed for commodity food products, the  amount of sample needed may be prohibitive to apply  to the cannabis industry. Alternatively, The food testing  QuEChERS screen uses smaller quantities and may be  
more applicable to a variety, though not all, of cannabis  products (Schoen 2013, personal communication to AHP,  unreferenced). 
In the cannabis industry today, the most commonly  used screening technology for organophosphates, organo chlorines, carbamates, and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid  (EDTA) are immunoassays (e.g., enzyme-linked immuno sorbent assays [ELISA]) and broad spectrum field tests that  may or may not be validated for use on cannabis. Similarly,  immunoassays for a broad range of PGRs and fungicides  commonly used in cannabis cultivation are not available.  Because of their relative inexpense, immunoassays are rou tinely used by analytical labs specializing in cannabis testing  and are at high risk of not detecting pesticide residues and  reporting samples to be “pesticide-free” or “non-detected”.  Before commercial use, any immunoassay should be vali dated against a standard testing methodology. 
Table 10 provides a list of the most common pesticides  (including acaricides, insecticides, fungicides, and plant  growth regulators) used in cannabis production. 
Solvent Residues 
Limits on solvents used in the manufacture of botanical  products are established by the International Conference  on Harmonization (ICH) (ICH 2011), with exceptions  made for ethanol and acetic acid in products formulated  to contain these substances (e.g., tinctures and vinegars).  According to the ICH guideline, solvents are categorized  in 3 classes. Class 1 includes known carcinogens, toxic  substances, and environmental hazards such as benzene,  carbon tetrachloride, 1,2-dichloroethane, 1,1-dichloroeth ene, and 1,1,1-trichloroethane. These are to be avoided in  the manufacture of herbal and/or pharmaceutical products.  Class 2 and 3 solvents (Table 12) are distinguished based  on their relative toxicity level. Limits established for permis sible daily exposures (PDE) are determined individually  for Class 2 solvents. Limits for Class 3 solvents are set at a  general limit of 50 mg/day. In addition, the ICH guideline  lists solvents for which no adequate toxicological data was  found (Table 13) and requires manufacturers of pharma ceutical products that choose to use these solvents to supply  justification for residual levels of these solvents in their final  products. Petroleum ether, found in this group, is reportedly  used in the production of hash oil (UNODC 2009). 
Solvent extracted products made with Class 3 or other  solvents, are not to exceed 0.5% residual solvent by weight or  5000 parts per million (PPM) per 10 gram of solvent-based  product and are to be quantified according to the United  States Pharmacopeia (USP <467>), Residual Solvents,  Option 1. Higher concentrations may also be acceptable  provided they are realistic in relation to safety, manufactur ing, and good manufacturing practices. 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 51 
Table 12 Permissable and restricted solvents in the manufacture of cannabis preparations 
Class 2 solvents Class 3 solvents 
Permissible daily exposure: 
Solvent 50 mg/day Permissible daily exposure, 
mg/day 
Acetonitrile 4.1 Acetic acid† 
Chlorobenzene 3.6 Acetone 
Chloroform* 0.6 Anisole 
Cyclohexane 38.8 1-Butanol 
1,2-Dichlorothene 18.7 2-Butanol 
Dichloromethane* 6.0 Butyl acetate 
1,2-Dimethoxyethane 1.0 tert-Butylmethylether N,N-Dimethylacetamide* 10.9 Cumene* 
N,N-Dimethylformamide 8.8 Dimethyl sulfoxide 1,4-Dioxane* 3.8 Ethanol*† 
2-Ethoxyethanol 1.6 Ethyl acetate 
Ethyleneglycol 6.2 Ethyl ether 
Formamide 2.2 Ethyl formate 
Hexane 2.9 Formic acid 
Methanol* 30.0 Heptane 
2-Methoxyethanol 0.5 Isobutyl acetate 
Methylbutyl ketone 0.5 Isopropyl acetate Methylcyclohexane 11.8 Methyl acetate 
N-Methylpyrrolidone* 5.3 3-Methyl-1-butanol Nitromethane* 0.5 Methylethyl ketone Pyridine* 2.0 Methylisobutyl ketone Sulfolane 1.6 2-Methyl-1-propanol Tetrahydrofuran 7.2 Pentane 
Tetralin 1.0 1-Pentanol 
Toluene* 8.9 1-Propanol 
1,1,2-Trichloroethene 0.8 2-Propanol 
Xylene 21.7 Propyl acetate 
* Listed as chemicals known to the state of California to cause cancer or reproductive toxicity under Proposition 65 (CAEPA 2013). Source: AHPA (2008); CAEPA (2013); ICH (2011); United States Pharmacopeia (USP 30-NF 25 2007).
Table 13 Solvents for which no adequate toxicological data was found 
1,1-Diethoxypropane Methylisopropyl ketone 
1,1-Dimethoxymethane Methyltetrahydrofuran 
2,2-Dimethoxypropane Petroleum ether 
Isooctane Trichloroacetic acid 
Isopropyl ether Trifluoroacetic acid 
Source: ICH (2011). 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 52 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
I n t e r n a t i o n a l S t a t u s Definitions and regulations of what constitutes a “controlled  substance” and medically useful substance differ greatly be tween countries. There are also varying levels of tolerance for  use of mind-altering substances such as alcohol and canna bis. Internationally and domestically, regulations regarding  the medical and recreational use of cannabis are changing  rapidly. In the US, individual states have enacted their own  rights, regulations, and prohibitions regarding both medical  and recreational cannabis use, which conflict with federal  law. Similarly, a number of countries (e.g., the US, Cana da, Israel, the Netherlands, and others) provide an official  source of medicinal-grade cannabis to certain chronically ill  patients. Additionally, several countries (e.g., Canada, Den mark, Germany, Spain, New Zealand, United Kingdom)  have approved pharmaceutical preparations made from can nabis extracts (e.g., Sativex®) as prescription-only medicines  (MHRA 2010). 
The regulation of cannabis is a subject of international  treaties that include the US as a signatory (United Nations  1973). The US Controlled Substances Act (CSA) was  designed to fulfill the country’s treaty obligations under  the United Nations’ Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs  (1961). This treaty restricts cannabis to appropriate medical  use only, and places strict controls on cannabis cultivation in  a manner similar to those imposed on opium poppies. The  treaty does not apply to cannabis plants grown exclusively  for industrial (fiber and seed) or horticultural purposes.  As of 2013, there were 61 signatories to the Convention  (United Nations 2013a) and 54 signatories to the Protocol  that amended the convention in 1972 (United Nations  2013b). Following is a brief review of the manner in which  cannabis is regulated domestically and internationally. Due  to the rapidly changing regulatory environment, interested  readers must refer to primary regulatory policies in various  states and countries as well as expected requirements under  international treaties. 
United States 
The term “marihuana” is defined in the United States Code  (USC) as “all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether  growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from  any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture,  salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its  seeds or resin. Such “marihuana” term does not include  the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such  stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any  other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or  preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted  therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of can nabis, such plant which is incapable of germination” (USC  2010). This language remains essentially unchanged from  the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937. 
Drug (Federal): “Marihuana,” “tetrahydrocannabinols” and  CBD are classified by the Drug Enforcement Administration  (DEA) as Schedule I controlled substances (DEA 2011a).  
The findings required to place a substance on Schedule I of  the Controlled Substances Act are: (a) the drug or other sub stance has a high potential for abuse; (b) the drug or other  substance has no currently accepted medical use in treat ment in the United States; and (c) there is a lack of accepted  safety for use of the drug or other substance under medical  supervision. Several formal petitions for the rescheduling of  cannabis have been denied (DEA 2011b).  
Rescheduling to Schedule II by the DEA requires for the  following 5-part test to be fulfilled: 1) the drug’s chemistry  must be known and reproducible; 2) there must be adequate  safety studies; 3) there must be adequate and well-controlled  studies proving efficacy; 4) the drug must be accepted by  qualified experts; and 5) the scientific evidence must be  widely available. Alternatively, rescheduling could occur  by Executive Order of the President or by Congress. The  DEA rescheduled synthetic THC (dronabinol, Marinol®)  to Schedule II in 1985, and Schedule III in 1999. 
An exception is made for the “Compassionate Use”  Investigational New Drug (IND) Program: In 1976, the DC  Superior Court found a defendant suffering from glaucoma  not guilty of possession of marijuana based on the Common  Law Doctrine of Necessity (US v Randall). The defendant  successfully argued that inhalation of marijuana smoke had  a beneficial effect, normalizing intraocular pressure and  lessening visual distortions (DC Superior Court 1976). In  1978, the same glaucoma patient brought a lawsuit against  the federal government (Randall v US) for its role in dis rupting his legal access to marijuana. An outcome of the  lawsuit settlement by the Department of Health and Human  Services (HHS), which became the basis for the Food and  Drug Administration (FDA) Compassionate IND Program,  was that the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)  would begin supplying cannabis to patients whose physi cians applied for and received use permits from the FDA.  The NIDA provides funding to the University of Mississippi  for growing, harvesting and storage of cannabis as well as  potency monitoring and other services for the DEA (NIDA  1988). The NIDA is responsible for shipping the marijuana  to registered patients. Medical diagnosis of Compassionate  IND Program patients have included (ProCon.org 2014) 
• AIDS 
• Glaucoma 
• Multiple Congenital Cartilaginous Exostoses • Multiple sclerosis 
• Nail Patella Syndrome 
Drug (State): To date, medical cannabis laws have been  enacted in 22 states and the District of Columbia (Stroup  2014). These laws exist in conflict with federal laws leav ing discretion to US Attorneys on when to enforce federal  law against participants in state-sanctioned programs. To  date, however, there has been no attempt by the federal  government to overturn such state laws. In August 2013  the Department of Justice issued a memo to US attorneys  advising that individuals and companies following state  laws should not be priorities for prosecution but ultimately 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 53 
left the decision of whether or not to prosecute up to US  Attorneys (Cole 2013). 
Recreational (State): In 2012, Washington and Colorado,  both of which allow for the medical use of cannabis, through  ballot initiative, approved the controlled recreational use of  cannabis, limiting its use to legal-age adults and with spe 
cific restrictions.  
In 2000–2007, there have been approximately 7.9 million  cannabis-related arrests in the US (US Bureau of Justice  Statistics) making cannabis-related crimes one of the most  frequently enforced crimes in the country. In 2012, there  were a total of 749,825 marijuana arrests, of which 91,593  were trafficking/sale arrests and 658,231 were for possession  (FBI Uniform Crime Report 2012). 
Canada 
Canadians currently have access to the widest representa tion of cannabinoid drugs in the world, including dronabi nol (Marinol®), nabilone (Cesamet®), Sativex®, and  crude cannabis. Canada also re-legalized industrial hemp  cultivation in 1998. Cannabis for medical use is regulated  under the Marihuana for Medical Purposes Regulations  (MMPR), which came into force on June 7, 2013. Under  the MMPR, marihuana for one’s own medical purposes or  for those of another person for whom they are responsible  may be obtained only from a) a licensed producer In accor dance with a medical document (signed by a licensed health  care practitioner), b) from a health care practitioner in the  course of treatment, or c) from a hospital in accordance with  Narcotic Control Regulations. An individual may obtain up  to 30 times the daily quantity from a licensed producer or  from a hospital. Individuals must register to become clients  of a licensed producer. Adults who reside in Canada and/or  corporations with a head office or branch office in Canada  are eligible to apply for a producer’s license (Government of  Canada 2014). 
Indications: Potential therapeutic uses are outlined in  Health Canada’s information for health care professionals  on cannabis and the cannabinoids. The listed uses include  the following: 
• Alzheimer’s disease and dementia  
• Arthritides and Musculoskeletal Disorders  • Asthma 
• Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting • Epilepsy 
• Gastrointestinal system disorders (irritable bowel  syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, hepatitis,  pancreatitis, metabolic syndrome/obesity)  
• Glaucoma 
• Hypertension 
• Inflammation (Inflammatory skin diseases [dermati tis, psoriasis, pruritus]) 
• Movement disorders (dystonia, Huntington’s Disease,  Parkinson’s Disease, Tourette’s syndrome) 
• Multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, spi nal cord injury  
• Pain (acute and chronic) 
• Palliative care (relief from pain and other distressing  symptoms, and the enhancement of quality of life) 
• Psychiatric disorders (alcohol and opioid withdrawal  symptoms [drug withdrawal symptoms], anxiety and  depression, sleep disorders, schizophrenia and psy chosis 
• Wasting syndrome (cachexia, e.g., from tissue injury  by infection or tumor) and loss of appetite (anorexia)  in AIDS and cancer patients, and anorexia nervosa  (Health Canada 2013). 
European Union (EU) 
In the EU, rules regarding the commerce of cannabis are  not harmonized. Possession of small amounts for medical or  personal use has been decriminalized or liberalized to varying  degrees in several countries including Belgium, the Czech  Republic, Estonia, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland,  Portugal, and Spain, as well as in some non-EU European  countries like Switzerland (Reuter 2010; Rosmarin and  Eastwood 2012). The Netherlands and the Czech Republic  have enacted programs for access to dried cannabis flowers  for medical use. The Netherlands represents the most lib eral state in terms of access to cannabis for both medicinal  and recreational use; France, in contrast, has prohibited  cannabis drugs since 1925, but never outlawed fiber-type  plants (France was the only country in Western Europe that  grew hemp between 1982 and 1985). Spain, because of its  proximity to Morocco, leads the world in hashish seizures,  accounting for 26% of global seizures with 356 tons seized in  2011 and 326 tons in 2012 (UNODC 2014).. Concerning the  cultivation of industrial hemp, the current upper legal limit is  0.2% THC with a ratio of CBD to THC greater than one in  most European countries (UNODC 2009). 
In November 2013, a European citizens’ initiative  proposing the legalization of cannabis and the EU to  adopt a common policy on the control and regulation of  cannabis production, use and sale, was registered with the  European Commission. Citizens’ initiatives have one year  to collect one million signatures of EU citizens old enough  to vote. If the requisite number of signatures is obtained,  the Commission has 3 months to examine the initiative,  meet with the initiative organizers, hold a public hearing,  and prepare a formal response. The Commission is not  obliged to propose legislation as a result of an initiative. If  the Commission decides to put forward a legislative pro posal, the normal legislative procedure kicks off, i.e. the  Commission proposal is submitted to the legislator (gener ally the European Parliament and the Council, or, in some  cases, only the Council) and, if adopted, it becomes law  (European Commission 2013).
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 54 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
India 
India enacted the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic  Substances Act in 1985, which brought India into com pliance with the UN’s Single Convention on Narcotic  Drugs. Ganja (flowering tops) and charas (hashish) are  illegal. Bhang (the dried leaf of cultivated or wild-collected  Cannabis sativa,) when used in traditional medicine prepa rations and products, is regulated as an active ingredient  of traditional medicines used in the Indian Systems of  Medicine (Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani). Quality standards  monographs are published in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia  of India (API), Siddha Pharmacopoeia of India (SPI), and  Unani Pharmacopoeia of India (UPI). 
Indications: Ayurveda: Agnimandya (digestive impair ment), anidra (insomnia), atisara (diarrhea), klaibya (male  impotence), grahani roga (malabsorption syndrome) (API  1989); Siddha: Kakkirumal (whooping cough), mikupaci  (excessive appetite), narampuvali (neuralgia), orraittalaivali  (hemicranias/migraine), perumpatu (menorrhagia), vanti peti (vomiting and diarrhea) (SPI 2008). Unani: Ishal (diar rhea), kasrat-e-tams (polymenorrhagia), bawaseer (piles),  sual (bronchitis), waj-ul-kabid (hepatalgia), qulanj (colic)  (UPI 2007). 
Israel 
In July 2011, the Israeli Cabinet approved arrangements and  supervision regarding the supply of cannabis for medical and  research uses in recognition that the medical use of can nabis is necessary in certain cases. The Health Ministry, in  coordination with the Israel Police and the Israel Anti-Drug  Authority, is responsible for supplies from imports and local  cultivation (State of Israel Prime Minister’s Office 2011). 
In December 2013, the Israeli Cabinet amended the  medical marijuana regulations by increasing the pool of  physicians allowed to prescribe cannabis to their patients  from 21 to 31. The new rule also changes the way in which  marijuana can be grown, packaged and distributed in Israel.  As of early 2014, approximately 14,000 patients have been  given prescriptions to use medicinal marijuana. 
Quality: There are currently 10 different strains of mari juana being grown by 8 authorized growers and distributed  to patients with a prescription (Israeli Medical Association  2014). 
Indications: Cannabis prescriptions are available for these  conditions (and others on a case-by-case basis): • AIDS wasting syndrome 
• Asthma 
• Chronic pain due to a proven organic etiology  
• HIV patients with significant loss of body weight or  a CD4 cell count below 400 
• Inflammatory bowel disease (but not Irritable Bowel  Syndrome) 
• Malignant cancerous tumor in various stages 
• Multiple sclerosis 
• Orphan diseases (i.e., diseases and conditions that  affect only a small percentage of the population  and for which few, if any, pharmaceutical drugs are  developed) 
• Parkinson’s Disease 
• Vomiting and pain associated with chemotherapy  for cancer (Stafford Mader 2013). 
Netherlands 
The Office for Medicinal Cannabis (OMC) is responsible  for the production of cannabis (dried flower tips harvested  from female Cannabis sativa plants) for medical and sci entific purposes and is the exclusive supplier of medicinal  
cannabis to pharmacies, and on its import and export. Quality: Medicinal cannabis provided by the OMC is of  pharmaceutical quality, produced under controlled culti vation according to Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs).  Three types of medicinal cannabis are available through  pharmacies: Bedrocan, Bedrobinol, and Bediol. The rec ommended modes of administration are by making tea or  through inhalation. 
Indications: According to OMC, there is sufficient reason to  believe that medicinal cannabis can help in cases of: • Pain and muscle spasms or cramps associated with  multiple sclerosis or spinal cord damage; 
• Nausea, loss of appetite, weight loss, and debilita tion due to cancer or AIDS; 
• Nausea and vomiting associated with chemotherapy  or radiotherapy used in the treatment of cancer,  hepatitis C or HIV infection and AIDS; 
• Chronic pain; primarily pain associated with the  nervous system, (e.g., damaged nerve, phantom  pain, facial neuralgia or chronic pain which remains  after the recovery from shingles); 
• Gilles de la Tourette syndrome; 
• Therapy-resistant glaucoma (OMC 2011). 
Switzerland 
Medical use: Obtaining marketing authorization from  Swissmedic for Complementary and Herbal Medicinal  Products (KPAV) that contain preparations made from  Cannabis sativa as an active ingredient is possible  (Swissmedic 2013a). In November 2013 the first canna 
bis product received marketing authorization, Sativex®  Spray (Cannabis sativae folii cum flore extractum spissum)  (Swissmedic 2013b). 
Indications: Treatment for symptom improvement in adult  patients with moderate to severe spasticity due to multiple  sclerosis who have not responded adequately to other anti spasticity medication and who demonstrate clinically sig-
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 55 
nificant improvement in spasticity related symptoms during  an initial trial of therapy (Almirall AG 2013). 
Recreational use: In 2012, the Federal Assembly amended  the federal law on narcotics and psychotropic substances,  ostensibly decriminalizing possession of up to 10 grams  of cannabis with the implementation of a simplified pro 
cedure for imposing a flat fee fine in the amount of 100  Swiss Francs (Federal Assembly of the Swiss Confederation  2012). 
Uruguay 
In December 2013, Uruguay became the first country to  legalize the growing, sale, and smoking of cannabis. The  government-sponsored bill that led to this approval provides  for regulation of the cultivation, distribution, and consump 
tion of cannabis. The primary stated motivation of the legisla tion was to fight drug trafficking of cannabis (Uruguay, Law  No. 19.172). The law allows for Uruguayan residents over  the age of 18 to become a registered user and to purchase up  to 40 grams (1.4 ounces) per month from licensed pharma cies. A government database will monitor consumer monthly  purchases. Additionally, Uruguayans will be able to grow 6  cannabis plants in their homes a year, or as much as 480  grams (approximately 17 ounces), and form smoking clubs  of 15–45 members that can grow up to 99 plants per year.  Regional leaders in Latin America consider legalization as a  way to help curb the criminal activity and violence associated  with the illegal drug trade. 
Under the law, a drug control board will be convened  that will regulate cultivation standards, fix prices, and moni tor consumption of registered users. The use of cannabis is  legal in Uruguay, but until this law, cultivation and sale of  the drug was not. 
Select Countries with Severe Penalties for  Cannabis Possession or Trafficking 
Indonesia 
Penalties for possession, use, or trafficking in illegal drugs  in Indonesia are severe, and convicted offenders can expect  long jail sentences and heavy fines. A life sentence or the  death penalty can be given in cases of drug trafficking (US  Department of State 2014). 
Iran 
Iran executes many people each year on drug-related charg es (US Department of State 2014). Under the 2011 Anti Narcotics Law the term “narcotic” (for certain offenses)  refers to bhang (preparation of the leaves and flower tops of  Indian hemp), Indian hemp juice, opium, opium juice or  residue, or synthetic non-medical psychotropic substances  listed by Parliament. The drugs cocaine, heroin, GHB,  LSD, and MDMA, among others, fall under a separate  “narcotic” definition with different punishments. Offenses  that carry the death penalty include fourth conviction for  cultivation of cannabis; third conviction for purchase, pos 
session, concealment or transport of 5–20 kg of cannabis;  and import, export, production, manufacture, distribution,  sale, or supply of more than 5 kg of cannabis. The death  penalty is commuted for first-time offenders when distribu 
tion or sale was not accomplished and the amount was less  than 20 kg (Amnesty International 2011). 
Malaysia 
Malaysian legislation provides for a mandatory death penal ty for convicted drug traffickers. Those arrested with posses sion of 200 grams (7 ounces) of cannabis will be presumed  by law to be trafficking in drugs (US Department of State  2014). The majority of those sentenced to death in Malaysia  were convicted of marijuana or hashish offenses with an  estimated 77 executions during 2008–2010 (Gallahue  2011). 
Saudi Arabia 
Those convicted of the import, manufacture, possession,  and/or consumption of illegal drugs in Saudi Arabia can  expect long jail sentences, heavy fines, public floggings, and/ or deportation. The penalty for drug trafficking in Saudi  Arabia is death. Saudi officials make no exceptions (US  Department of State 2014). 
Singapore 
Singapore has a mandatory death penalty for many narcot ics offenses including trafficking cannabis. Police have the  authority to compel both residents and non-residents to  submit to random drug analysis (US Department of State  2014). Any person having in his/her possession more than  15 grams of cannabis, 30 grams of cannabis mixture (any  mixture of vegetable matter containing THC and CBD in  any quantity), or 10 grams of cannabis resin (any substance  containing resinous material and in which THC and CBD  are found in any quantity) shall be presumed to have had that  drug in possession for the purpose of trafficking. The punish 
ment for trafficking in cannabis where the quantity is not less  than 330 grams and not more than 500 grams is maximum  30 years or imprisonment for life and 15 strokes of the cane.  The minimum punishment is 20 years and 15 strokes of the  cane. The penalty for trafficking more than 500 grams is  death (AGC Singapore 2008). 
United Arab Emirates (UAE) 
Legislation enacted in January 1996 imposes the death  sentence for convicted drug traffickers. Since January 2006,  possession of even trace amounts of illegal drugs, which  include cannabis, has resulted in lengthy prison sentences  for foreign citizens transiting the UAE. It is possible to be  convicted for drug possession based on the result of a drug  test even if no other evidence exists, regardless of when or  where the consumption originally occurred (US Department  of State 2014). 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 56 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
R e f e r e n c e s 
Adams R, Baker BR, Wearn RB.  1940a. Structure of cannabinol.  III. Synthesis of cannabinol,  
1-hydroxy-3-amyl-6,6,9-trimethyl 6-dibenzopyran. J Am Chem Soc  62:2204-7. 
Adams R, Hunt M, Clark JH. 1940b.  Structure of cannabidiol, a product  isolated from the marihuana extract  of Minnesota wild hemp. J Am  Chem Soc 62:196-200. 
Adams TC, Jones LA. 1975.  
Phytosterols of cannabis smoke. J  Agr Food Chem 23:352-3. 
[AGC Singapore] Attorney General’s  Chambers Singapore. 2008. Misuse  of Drugs Act (Chapter 185)  
Revised Edition 2008. [Internet].  Access Date: 2014 Jul 2. Available  from: http://statutes.agc.gov. 
sg/aol/search/display/view. 
w3p;ident=cf935efb-467e-4307- 9b86-85956a72c254;page=0;que ry=Id%3A%226d983371-cfd6- 
47d9-9c06-ab644ebdfc9f%22%20 Status%3Ainforce;rec=0#legis  Ahmed SA, Ross SA, Slade D, Radwan  MM, Khan IA, ElSohly MA.  
2008a. Structure determination  and absolute configuration of  cannabichromanone derivatives  from high potency Cannabis sativa.  Tetrahedron Lett 49:6050-53. 
Ahmed SA, Ross SA, Slade D, Radwan  MM, Zulfiqar F, ElSohly MA. 2008b  Cannabinoid ester constituents from  high-potency Cannabis sativa. J Nat  
Prod 71:536-42. 
[AHPA] American Herbal Products  Association. 2008. AHPA adopts  new trade recommendation;  
guidance on heavy metal,  
microbiological limits. Silver Spring  (MD): American Herbal Products  Association. Available from: http:// wwwahpa.org  
[AHPA] American Herbal  
Products Association. 2013a.  
Recommendations to regulators:  Cannabis dispensing operations.  Silver Spring (MD): American  Herbal Products Association. p. 12.  [AHPA] American Herbal  
Products Association. 2013b.  Recommendations to regulators:  Cannabis laboratory operations.  Silver Spring (MD): American  Herbal Products Association. p. 12.  
Alexander T. 1987. Hepatitis outbreak  linked to imported pot. Sinsemilla  Tips 7:22. 
Almirall AG. 2013. Sativex®.  [Internet]. Access Date: 2014 Jul  14. 6 p. Available from: http:// www.kompendium.ch/mpro/ mnr/24719/pdf/de?start=1#page1  
Amnesty International. 2011. Addicted  to death – executions for drug  offences in Iran. London (UK):  Amnesty International. [Internet].  Access Date: 2014 Jul 2. Available  from: https://doc.es.amnesty. 
org/cgi-bin/ai/BRSCGI/ 
EXECUTIONS%20FOR%20 DRUGS%20OFFENCES%20 IN%20IRAN?CMD=VEROBJ&M LKOB=30179594646  
Anderson LC. 1980. Leaf variation  among Cannabis species from a  controlled garden. Bot Museum  Leaf Harv Univ 28:10. 
[API] Ayurveda Pharmacopoeia India.  1989. The Ayurveda Pharmacopoeia  of India. New Delhi: Ayurveda  Pharmacopoeia Commitee; Ministry  Health Family Welfare Government  India.  
Appendino G, Chianese G,  
Taglialatela-Scafati O. 2011.  
Cannabinoids: occurrence and  medicinal chemistry. Curr Med  Chem 18:1085-99. 
Appendino G, Gibbons S, Giana A,  Pagani A, Grassi G, Stavri M, Smith  E, Rahman MM. 2008. Antibacterial  cannabinoids from Cannabis sativa: a  structure-activity study. J Nat Prod  71:1427-30. 
[ASA] Americans for Safe Access.  2013. Patient Focused Certification.  Washington (DC) Americans for  Safe Access. [Internet] Access  Date: 2013 Dec 2. Available from:  PatientFocusedCertification.org  
Avraham Y, Ben-Shushan D, Breuer  A, Zolotarev O, Okon A, Fink  N, Katz V, Berry EM. 2004. Very  low doses of Δ8-THC increase  food consumption and alter  
neurotransmitter levels following  weight loss. Pharmacol Biochem  Behav 77:675-84. 
Banerjee SP, Snyder SH, Mechoulam  R. 1975. Cannabinoids: influence on  neurotransmitter uptake in rat brain  synaptosomes. J Pharmacol Exp  Ther 194:74-81. 
Barrett ML, Gordon D, Evans FJ.  1985. Isolation from Cannabis sativa  L. of cannflavin—a novel inhibitor  of prostaglandin production.  
Biochem Pharm 34:2019-24. 
Basile AC, Sertie JA, Freitas PC,  Zanini AC. 1988. Anti-inflammatory  activity of oleoresin from Brazilian  Copaifera. J Ethnopharmacol  22:101-9. 
Bazzaz FA, Dusek D, Seigler DS,  Haney AW. 1975. Photosynthesis  and cannabinoid content of  
temperate and tropical populations  of Cannabis sativa. Biochem Syst  Ecol 3:15-18. 
Bercht CAL, Lousberg RJJ, Küppers  FJEM, Salemink CA. 1974.  
Cannabis. IX. Cannabicitran. New  naturally occurring tetracyclic  diether from Lebanese Cannabis  sativa. Phytochemistry 13:619–21. 
Bercht CAL, Lousberg RJJ, Küppers  FJEM, Salemink CA, Vree TB, Van  Rossum JM. 1973. Cannabis. VII.  Identification of cannabinol methyl  ether from hashish. J Chromatog B  81:163–6. 
Bercht CAL, Paris MR. 1974. Oil  of Cannabis sativa. Bull Technique  [Gattefosse] 68:87-90. 
Bergamaschi MM, Queiroz RH,  Chagas MH, de Oliveira DC,  
De Martinis BS, Kapczinski F,  Quevedo J, Roesler R, Schroder N,  Nardi AE. et al. 2011. Cannabidiol  reduces the anxiety induced by  simulated public speaking in  
treatment-naive social phobia  patients. Neuropsychopharmacology  36:1219-26. 
Bertoli A, Tozzi S, Pistelli L,  
Angelini LG. 2010. Fibre hemp  inflorescences: from crop-residues  to essential oil production. Ind  Crops Prod 32:329-37. 
Biro T, Toth BI, Hasko G,  
Paus R, Pacher P. 2009. The  
endocannabinoid system of the  skin in health and disease: novel  perspectives and therapeutic  
opportunities. Trends Pharmacol Sci  30:411-20. 
Bisogno T, Hanus L, De Petrocellis L,  Tchilibon S, Ponde DE, Brandi I,  Moriello AS, Davis JB, Mechoulam  R, Di Marzo V. 2001. Molecular  targets for cannabidiol and its  synthetic analogues: effect on  vanilloid VR1 receptors and on  the cellular uptake and enzymatic  hydrolysis of anandamide. Br J  Pharmacol 134:845-52. 
[BMC] Bureau voor Medicinale  Cannabis. 2010. Monografie voor  analyse van de grondstof Cannabis flos (hennepbloemen): analytical  monograph. The Netherlands:  Bureau voor Medicinale Cannabis.  21 p. 
Bocsa I, Mathe P, Hangyel L. 1997.  Effect of nitrogen on by means of  population genetics in a monoecious  hemp stand. tetrahydrocannabinol  (THC) content in hemp (Cannabis  sativa L.) leaves at different positions.  J Int Hemp Assoc 4:80–1. 
Boeren EG, ElSohly MA, Turner  CE. 1979. Cannabiripsol: a novel  Cannabis constituent. Experientia  35:1278-9. 
Bolognini D, Costa B, Maione S,  Comelli F, Marini P, Di Marzo  
V. 2010. The plant cannabinoid  Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin can  decrease signs of inflammation and  inflammatory pain in mice. Br J  Pharmacol 160:677-87. 
Booker L, Naidu PS, Razdan RK,  Mahadevan A, Lichtman AH.  2009. Evaluation of prevalent  
phytocannabinoids in the acetic acid  model of visceral nociception. Drug  Alcohol Depend 105:42-7. 
Booz GW. 2011. Cannabidiol as  an emergent therapeutic strategy  for lessening the impact of  
inflammation on oxidative stress.  Free Rad Biol Med 51:1054-61. Bowd A, Swann DA, Turnbull  JH. 1975. Photochemical  
transformations of cannabinol. J  Chem Soc Chem Comm 19:797–8. Brenneisen R. 1984. Psychotropic  drugs. II. Determination of  
cannabinoids in Cannabis sativa L.  and in cannabis products with high  pressure liquid chromatography  (HPLC). Pharmaceut Acta Helv  59:247-59. 
Brenneisen R, ElSohly MA. 1988.  Chromatographic and spectroscopic  profiles of Cannabis of different  origins: Part 1. J Forensic Sci  
33:1385-1404. 
Brickell CD, Alexander C, David  JC, Hetterscheid WLA, Leslie  AC, Malecot V, Jin X, Cubey  
JJ. Editors. 2009. New edition  of the International Code of  
Nomenclature for cultivated plants.  Belgium: International Society  Horticultural Science. 204 p. 
Burstein SH. 1999. The cannabinoid  acids: nonpsychoactive derivatives  with therapeutic potenital.  
Pharmacol Ther 82:87-96. 
Busse FP, Fiedler GF, Leichtle A,  Hentschel H, Stumvoll M. 2008.  Lead poisoning due to adulterated  marijuana in Leipzig. Dtsch Arztebl  Int 105:757-62. 
Buys YM, Rafuse PE. 2010. Canadian  Ophthalmological Society policy  statement on the medical use of  marijuana for glaucoma. Can J  Ophthalmol 45:324-326. 
[CAEPA] California Environmental  Protection Agency. 2013. Chemicals  known to the state of California  to cause cancer or reproductive  toxicity. Sacramento (CA): California  Environmental Protection Agency.  22 p.  
Cahn RS. 1932. Cannabis indica resin.  III. Constitution of cannabinol. J  Chem Soc 1342-53. 
Campbell WE, Gammon DW, Smith  P, Abrahams M, Purves TD. 1997. 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 57 
Composition and antimalarial  activity in vitro of the essential oil  of Tetradenia riparia. Planta Med  63:270-2. 
Campos AC, Guimaraes FS. 2008.  Involvement of 5HT1A receptors  in the anxiolytic-like effects of  cannabidiol injected into the  
dorsolateral periaqueductal gray of  rats. Psychopharmacology 199:223- 30. 
Carod-Artal FJ. 2003. Neurological  syndromes associated with the  ingestion of plants and fungi  with a toxic component (II).  
Hallucinogenic fungi and plants,  mycotoxins and medicinal herbs.  Rev Neurol 36:951-60. 
Carrier EJ, Auchampach JA,  
Hillard CJ. 2006. Inhibition of an  equilibrative nucleoside transporter  by cannabidiol: a mechanism of  cannabinoid immunosuppression.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:7895- 900. 
Cascio MG, Gauson LA, Stevenson  LA, Ross R, Pertwee RG. 2010.  Evidence that the plant cannabinoid  cannabigerol is a highly potent  alpha2-adrenoceptor agonist and  moderately potent 5HT1A receptor  antagonist. Br J Pharmacol 159:129- 41. 
Cates WC, Warren JW. 1975. Hepatitis  B in Nuremberg, Germany.  
Epidemiology of a drug-associated  epidemic among US Army soldiers.  JAMA 234:930-4. 
Cawthorne MA, Wargent E,  
Zaibi M, Stott C, Wright S.  
2007. The CB1 antagonist, Δ9- tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV)  has antiobesity activity in dietary induced obese (DIO) mice. Saubt Sauverur (QC): Inter Cann Res Soc.  141 p. 
[CDFA] California Department of  Food and Agriculture. 2011. Notice  of quarantine and removal from  sale. [Internet]. Access Date: 2014  Jul 23. Available from: http://www. cdfa.ca.gov  
Cervantes J. 2006. Marijuana  
horticulture: the indoor/outdoor  medical grower’s bible. Vancouver  (WA): Van Patten Pub. 512 p. 
Chalchat JC, Garry RP, Michet A,  Remery A. 1985. The essential oil of  two chemotypes of Pinus sylvetris (oil  of type A). Phytochem 24:24-43. 
Chandra S, Lata H, Khan IA, ElSohly  MA. 2008. Photosynthetic response  of Cannabis sativa L. to variations  in photosynthetic photon flux  densities, temperature and CO2  conditions. Physiol Mol Biol Plants  14:299-306. 
Chandra S, Lata H, Khan IA, ElSohly  MA. 2011b Photosynthetic response  of Cannabis sativa L., an important  medicinal plant, to elevated levels  
of CO2. Physiol Mol Biol Plants  17:291–95. 
Chandra S, Lata H, Khan IA,  
ElSohly MA. 2013. The role of  biotechnology in Cannabis sativa propagation for the production of  phytocannabinoids. Berlin: Springer  Verlag. 123-48 p. 
Chandra S, Lata H, Khan IA, MA. E.  2011a. Temperature response of  photosynthesis in different drug and  fiber varieties of Cannabis sativa L.  Physiol Mol Biol Plants 17:297–303. 
Chen GH, Majumdar AS. 2006.  Drying of herbal medicines and tea.  In: Mujumdar AS, editor. Handbook  of industrial drying. 3rd ed. Boca  Raton: CRC p. 1312. 
Clark MN. 1978. A study of  
infraspecific flavonoid variation of  Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae).  [Masters Thesis]. Vancouver (Can):  University of British Columbia. 
Clark MN, Bohm BA. 1979. Flavonoid  variation in Cannabis. Bot J Linnean  Soc 79:249-57. 
Clarke RC. 1981. Marijuana botany:  an advanced study, the propagation  and breeding of distinctive cannabis.  Berkeley (CA): Ronin 197 p. 
Clarke RC, Merlin MD. 2013.  
Cannabis: evolution and  
ethonobotany. Berleley (CA): Univ  Calif Pr. 434 p. 
Claussen U, Von Spulak F, Korte F.  1968. Hashish. XIV. Components of  hashish. Tetrahedron 24:1021–3. 
Cole JM. 2013. Guidance regarding  marijuana enforcement. Washington  (DC): US Department Justice.  Costa B. 2007. On the  
pharmacological properties of Δ9- tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Chem  Biodiv 4:1664–77. 
Crombie L, Crombie WML, Jamieson  SV. 1980. Extractives of Thailand  Cannabis: synthesis of canniprene  
and isolation of new geranylated and  prenylated chrysoeriols. Tetrahedron  Lett 21:3607-10. 
Crombie L, Ponsford R. 1971.  Synthesis of cannabinoids by  
pyridine catalyzed citral-olivetol  condensation: synthesis and  
structure of cannabicyclol,  
cannabichromene (hashish  
extractives), citrylidene-cannabis,  and related compounds. J Chem Soc  Org 4:796-804. 
Crombie L, Ponsford R, Shani  A, Yagnitinsky B, Mechoulam  R. 1968. Hashish components.  Photochemical production  
of cannabicyclol from  
cannabichromene. Tetrahedron Lett  55:5771-2. 
D.C. Superior Court. 1976. Crimina1  law and procedure: medical  
necessity. Washington (DC).  
[Internet]. Access Date: 2014 Jul 23.  
p. 2249-54. Available from: http:// www.drugpolicy.org/docUploads/ randall.pdf  
Daley P, Lampach D, Squerra S. 2013.  Testing Cannabis for contaminants.  Botec Analysis Corporation.  
Lafayette,CA: Alexander Shulgin  Research Institute. [Internet] No.  I-50 Project #430-1a. Access Date:  2014 Jul 2. 67 p. Available from:  http://lcb.wa.gov/publications/ Marijuana/BOTEC%20reports/1a Testing-for-Contaminants-Final Revised.pdf  
Davis WM, Hatoum NS. 1983.  Neurobehavioral actions of  
cannabichromene and interactions  with Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Gen  Pharmacol 14:247-52. 
[DEA] Drug Enforcement Agency.  2011a. Schedules of controlled  substances. In: Code of Federal  Regulations, Title 21, Part 1308.  
Washington (DC): U.S. Government  Printing Office. [Internet]. Access  Date: 2014 Jul 2. Available from:  http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/ CFR-2011-title21-vol9/pdf/CFR 2011-title21-vol9-part1308.pdf  
[DEA] Drug Enforcement Agency.  2011b. 21 CFR Chapter II. Denial  of petition to initiate proceedings  to reschedule marijuana. Federal  Register. [Internet]. Access Date:  2014 Jul 2. p. 40552-89. Available  from: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/ pkg/FR-2011-07-08/pdf/2011- 16994.pdf  
De Lago E, Fernandez-Ruiz J. 2007.  Cannabinoids and neuroprotection  in motor-related disorders. CNS  Neurol Dis Drug Target 6:377-87  
de Meijer EP, Bagatta M, Carboni  A, Crucitti P, PM. E, Cristiana M,  Paolo R, Mandolino G. 2003. The  inheritance of chemical phenotype  in Cannabis sativa L. Genetics  
163:335-46. 
de Meijer EP, Hammond K. 2005.  The inheritance of chemical  
phenotype in Cannabis sativa L. (II):  Cannabigerol predominant plants.  Euphytica 145(1):189-98. 
de Meijer EP, Hammond KM,  Sutton A. 2009. The inheritance  of chemical phenotype in Cannabis  sativa L. (IV): cannabinoid-free  plants. Euphytica 168:95-112. 
de Meijer EP, Van Der kamp HJ, Van  Eeuwijk FA. 1992. Characterization  of Cannabis accessions with regard  to cannabinoid content in relation  
to other plant characters. Euphytica  62:187-200. 
De Petrocellis L, Ligresti A, Moriello  AS, Allara M, Bisogno T, Petrosino  S, Stott CG, Di Marzo V. 2011a.  Effects of cannabinoids and  
cannabinoid-enriched cannabis  extracts on TRP channels and  endocannabinoid metabolic  
enzymes. Br J Pharmacol 163:479- 94. 
De Petrocellis L, Vellani V, Schiano Moriello A, Marini P, Magherini PC,  Orlando P, Di Marzo V. 2008. Plant derived cannabinoids modulate  the activity of transient receptor  potential channels of ankyrin type-1  and melastatin type-8. J Pharmacol  Exp Ther 325:1007-15. 
DeBacker B, Debrus B, Lebrun P,  Theunis L, Dubois N, Decock L,  Verstraete A, Hubert P, Charlier  C. 2009 Innovative development  and validation of an HPLC/ 
DAD method for the qualitative  and quantitative determination of  major cannabinoids in cannabis  plant material. J Chromatogr B Anal  Technol Biomed Life Sci 877:4115- 24. 
Debruyne D, Albessard F, Bigot MC,  Moulin M. 1994. Comparison of  three advanced chromatographic  techniques for Cannabis  
identification. Bull Narc 44:109-121. Dejesuse, Rodwick BM, Bowers D,  Cohen CJ, Pearce D. 2007. Use of  dronabinol improves appetite and  reverses weight loss in HIV/AIDS infected patients. J Int Assoc Phys  AIDS Care (Chic) 6:95-100. 
DeLong GT, Wolf CE, Poklis  A, Lichtman A. 2011.  
Cannabichromene and  
tetrahydrocannabinol determination  in mouse blood and brain by gas  chromatography-mass spectrometry.  J Anal Toxicol 35:496-500. 
Dewey WL. 1986. Cannabinoid  pharmacology. Pharmacol Rev  38:151-78. 
Deyo AR, Musty RE. 2003.  
Cannabichromene (CBC) extract  alters behavioral despair on the  mouse tail suspension test of  
depression. Burlington (VT):  
International Cannabinoid Research  Society. p. 146. 
Do Vale TG, Furtado EC, Santos  JG Jr, Viana GS. 2002. Central  effects of citral, myrcene and  limonene, constituents of essential  oil chemotypes from Lippia alba  (Mill.) NE Brown. Phytomedicine  9:709-14. 
Douwaite AH. 1947. Choice of drugs  in the treatment of duodenal ulcer.  BMJ 2:43-7. 
Dussy FE, Hamberg C, Luginbuhl M,  Schwerzmann T, Briellmann TA.  2005. Isolation of Δ9-THCA-A  from hemp and analytical aspects  concerning the determination of Δ9- THC in Cannabis products. Forensic  Sci Inter 149(1):3-10. 
[EC] European Commission. 2013.  Weed like to talk [Internet]. Access  Date: 2014 Jul 23. Available from:  http://ec.europa.eu/citizens 
initiative/public/initiatives/
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 58 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
ongoing/details/2013/000008/en  Eisenstein TK, Meissler JJ, Wilson  Q, Gaughan JP, Adler MW.  
2007. Anandamide and Δ9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol directly inhibit  cells of the immune system via  CB2 receptors. J Neuroimmunol  189:17-22. 
Elsohly HN, Turner CE, Clark AM,  Elsohly MA. 1982. Synthesis and  antimicrobial activities of certain  cannabichromene and cannabigerol  related compounds. J Pharm Sci  71:319-23. 
ElSohly MA, Holley JH, Lewis GS,  Russel MH, Turner CE. 1984.  Constituents of Cannabis sativa L.  XXLV. The potency of confiscated  marijuana, hashish, and hash oil  over a ten-year period. J Forensic  Sci:500-14. 
ElSohly MA, Ross SA, Mehmedic Z,  Arafat R, Yi B, Banahan BF 3rd.  2000. Potency trends of delta-9- THC and other cannabinoids in  confiscated marijuana from 1980- 1997. J Forensic Sci 45:24-30. 
ElSohly MA, Slade D. 2005. Chemical  constituents of marijuana: the  complex mixture of natural  
cannabinoids. Life Sci 78:539–48. Elsohly MA, Turner CE, Phoebe CH  J, Knapp JE, Schiff PL J, Slatkin  
DJ. 1978 Anhydrocannabisativine, a  new alkaloid from Cannabis sativa L. J  Pharmaceut Sci 67:124. 
Elson CE, Maltzman TH, Boston  JL, Tanner MA, Gould MN. 1997.  Anti-carcinogenic activity of  
d-limonene during the initiation  and promotion/progression stages  of DMBA-induced rat mammary  carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis  9:331-2. 
[EMCDDA] European Monitoring  Centre for Drugs and Drug  
Addiction. 2004. An overview  of Cannabis potency in Europe.  Luxembourg: Office Official  
Publications European  
Communities. 71 p. 
[EMCDDA] European Monitoring  Centre for Drugs and Drug  
Addiction. 2008. A cannabis reader:  global issues and local experiences.  Lisbon: European Monitoring  Centre for Drugs and Drug  
Addiction. 364 p. 
[EMCDDA] European Monitoring  Centre for Drugs and Drug  
Addiction. 2012. Cannabis  
production and markets in Europe.  Luxembourg: Office for Official  Publications of the European  Communities. 268 p. 
Eubanks LM, Rogers CJ, Beuschner  AE, Koob GF, Dickerson TJ, Janda  KD. 2006. A molecular link between  the active component of marijuana  and Alzheimer’s disease pathology.  Mol Pharmacol 3:773-7. 
Evans FJ. 1991. Cannabinoids:  the separation of central from  peripheral effects on a structural  basis. Planta Med 57:S60-67. 
Fairbairn JW, Liebman JA, Rowan MG.  1976. The stability of Cannabis and  its preparations on storage. J Pharm  Pharmacol 28 1-7. 
Falk AA, Hagberg MT, Lof AE,  Wigaeus-Hjelm EM, Wang ZP.  1990. Uptake, distribution and  elimination of alpha-pinene in man  after exposure by inhalation. Scand J  Work Environ Health 16:372-8. 
Fan X, Gates RA. 2001. Degradation  of monoterpenes in orange juice  by gamma radiation. J Agric Food  Chem 49:2422-6. 
Fan X, Sokorai KJ. 2002. Changes  in volatile compounds of gamma  irradiated fresh cilantro leaves during  cold storage. J Agric Food Chem  50:7622-6. 
[FBI] Federal Bureau of Investigation.  2013. Uniform crime reports: crime  in the United States 2012 [Internet].  Washington (DC): US Department  
of Justice; Access Date: 2014 Jul14.  Available from: http://www.fbi.gov/ about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the u.s/2012/crime-in-the-u.s.-2012/ persons-arrested/persons-arrested 
[FDA] Food and Drug Administration.  2001. Guidance for industry –  bioanalytical method validation.  Rockville (MD): US Department  Health and Human Services.  
[Internet]. Access Date: 2013 Oct  23. 25 p. Available from: http:// www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index. htm  
[FDA] Food and Drug Administration.  2011. Drug enforcement  
administration 21 CFR chapter II  [docket No. DEA–352N] denial  of petition to initiate proceedings  to reschedule marijuana: proposed  rules. Washington (DC): United  States Gov Printing. [Internet].  Access Date: 2013 Jan 3. 38 p.  Available from: http://r20.rs6.nettn. awkwbab&et=1106521392982&s=1 809&e=001G5iPdsWQryU6nhIGnS YKh8T51yEbI4L1L8ASx3MJqpCTi 0O82d7YTvqHRIfsa8KbIt2Q86uH T2h13vI53Finy5qxIbhFTnfczuRBU 1z36-yVVwEb4kMgBBVfl4JLSPhg tnfaWydsoGgX72R519uITmF_3XO r9tToyMlmwrVosQ=  
[FDA] Food and Drug Administration.  2013a. Bacteriological analytical  manual (BAM). [Internet]. Access  Date: 2014 Jul 24. Available  
from: http://www.fda.gov/ 
food/foodscienceresearch/ 
laboratorymethods/ucm2006949. htm  
[FDA] Food and Drug Administration.  2013b. Pesticide analytical manual  (PAM). [Internet]. Access Date: 2014  Jul 24. Available from: http://www. 
fda.gov/food/foodscienceresearch/ laboratorymethods/ucm2006955. htm  
Federal Assembly of the Swiss  Confederation. 2012. Loi fédérale  sur les stupéfiants et les substances  psychotropes (Loi sur les stupéfiants,  LStup) - Modification du 28  
septembre 2012. Bern The Swiss  Parliament. Access Date: 2014 Jul 2.  Available from: http://www.admin. ch/ch/f/ff/2012/7539.pdf  
Fellermeier M, Zenk MH. 1998.  Prenylation of olivetolate  
by a hemp transferase yields  
cannabigerolic acid, the precursor  of tetrahydrocannabinol. FEBS Lett  427:283-5. 
Fisar Z. 2009 Phytocannabinoids and  endocannabinoids. Cur Drug Abuse  Rev 2:51-75. 
Fischedick JT, Hazekamp A, Erkelens  T, Hae Choi Y, Verpoorte R.  
2010. Metabolic fingerprinting of  Cannabis sativa L., cannabinoids and  terpenoids for chemotaxonomic  and drug standardization purposes.  Phytochemistry 71:2058-73. 
Fisse J, Braut F, Cosson L, Paris  M. 1981. In vitro study of the  organogenetic capacity of C. sativa L. tissues: effect of different growth  substances. Plantes Med Phytother  15:217–23. 
Flores Sanchez IJ, Verpoorte R. 2008.  Secondary metabolism in Cannabis.  Phytochem Rev 7:615–39. 
Foote RS, Jones LA. 1974. Analysis  of the phytosterols of two varieties  of Cannabis. J Agric Food Chem  22:534-5. 
Fournier GC, Richez-Dumanois J,  Duvezin JP, Paris M, Paris M. 1987.  Identification of a new chemotype  in Cannabis sativa: cannabigerol dominant plants, biogenetic and  agronomic prospects. Planta Med  53:277-80. 
Fox PJ, Zajicek JP. 2002. Cannabis  for multiple sclerosis. Prac Neurol  3:154-60. 
Friedrich-Fiechtl J, Spiteller G. 1975.  New cannabinoids. I. Tetrahedron  31:479-87. 
Galal AM, Slade D, Gul W, El-Alfy  AT, Ferreira D, Elsohly MA. 2009.  Naturally occurring and related  synthetic cannabinoids and their  potential therapeutic applications.  Recent Pat CNS Drug Discov  4(2):112-36. 
Gallahue P. 2011. The death penalty  for drug offences global overview  2011. London Harm Reduction  International. [Internet]. Access  Date: 2014 Jul 2. 44 p. Available  from: http://www.ihra.net/ 
files/2011/09/14/IHRA_ 
DeathPenaltyReport_Sept2011_ Web.pdf  
Gaoni Y, Mechoulam R. 1964a.  Hashish. III. Isolation, structure,  and partial synthesis of an active  constituent of hashish. J Am Chem  Soc 86:1646–7. 
Gaoni Y, Mechoulam R. 1964b.  Structure and synthesis of  
cannabigerol, a new hashish  
constituent. Proceedings of the  Chemical Society: 82. 
Gaoni Y, Mechoulam R. 1966.  Cannabichromene, a new active  principle in hashish. Chem Comm  1:20-1. 
García C, Palomo-Garo C, García Arencibia M, Ramos J, Pertwee R,  Fernández-Ruiz J. 2011. Symptom relieving and neuroprotective effects  of the phytocannabinoid Δ9-THCV  in animal models of Parkinson’s  disease. Br J Pharmacol 163:1495- 506. 
Gattefosse RM. 1993. Gatefosse’s  aromatherapy. Essex (MD): CW  Daniel Ltd. 176 p. 
Gertsch J, Leonti M, Raduner S, Racz  I, Chen JZ, Xie XQ, Altmann  KH, Karsak M, Zimmer A. 2008.  Beta-caryophyllene is a dietary  cannabinoid. Proc Natl Acad Sci  USA 105:9099-104. 
Gettman J. 2006. Marijuana production  in the United States (2006). Bull  Cannabis Reform. [Internet]. Access  Date: 2014 Jul 28. p. 25. Available  from: http://www.drugscience.org/ Archive/bcr2/MJCropReport_2006. pdf  
Ghelardini C, Galeotti N, Di Cesare  Mannelli L, Mazzanti G, Bartolini  A. 2001. Local anaesthetic activity  of β-caryophyllene Il Farmaco 56  387-9. 
Ghosh R, Todd AR, Wilkinson S.  1940. Cannabis indica. V. Synthesis of  cannabinol. J Chem Soc:1393-6. 
Gil ML, Jimenez J, Ocete MA,  Zarzuelo A, Cabo MM. 1989.  Comparative study of different  essential oils of Bupleurum  
gibraltaricum Lamarck. Die  
Pharmazie 44:284-7. 
Gill EW. 1971. Propyl homolog of  tetrahydrocannabinol: isolation from  Cannabis, properties, and synthesis. J  Chem Soc C: Organic 3:579-82. 
Gomes A, Fernandes E, Lima JLFC,  Mira L, Corvo ML. 2008. Molecular  mechanisms of anti-inflammatory  activity mediated by flavonoids. Curr  Med Chem 15:1586–605. 
Government of Canada. 2014.  Consolidation: marihuana for  medical purposes regulations.  Ottowa: Minister of Justice.  
[Internet] No. SOR/2013-119.  Access Date: 2014 Jul 24. 117 p.  Available from: http://www.laws lois.justice.gc.ca/PDF/SOR-2013- 119.pdf 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 59 
Grote H, Spiteller G. 1978a. New  cannabinoids. II. J Chromatog  154:13-23. 
Grote H, Spiteller G. 1978b. New  cannabinoids. The structure of  cannabicoumaronone and analogous  compounds. Tetrahedron 34:3207– 13. 
Hammond C, Mahlberg P. 1977.  Morphogenesis of capitate  
glandular hairs of Cannabis sativa  L. (Cannabaceae). Amer J Botany  65:1023-31. 
Hampson AJ, Grimaldi M, Axelrod  J, Wink D. 1998. Cannabidiol and  (-)Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol are  neuroprotective antioxidants. Proc  Natl Acad Sci 95:8268-73. 
Haney M, Gunderson EW, Rabkin J,  Hart CL, Vosburg SK, Comer SD,  Foltin RW. 2007. Dronabinol and  marijuana in HIV-positive marijuana  smokers. Caloric intake, mood and  sleep. JAIDS 45:545–54. 
Hartsel SC, Loh WH, Robertson  LW. 1983. Biotransformation of  cannabidiol to cannabielsoin by  suspension cultures of Cannabis  sativa and Saccharum officinarum.  Planta Med 48:17-9. 
Harvey DJ. 1976. Characterization  of the butyl homologues of Δ1- tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabinol  and cannabidiol in samples  
of Cannabis by combined gas  
chromatography and mass  
spectrometry. J Pharm Pharmacol  28:280-5. 
Harvey DJ. 1985. Examination of a  140 year old ethanolic extract of  Cannabis: identificaton of a new  
cannabitriol homologues and the  ethyl homologue of cannabinol. In: Harvey DJ, Paton W, Nahas GG,  editors. Marihuana ‘84 Proceedings  of the Oxford Symposium on  Cannabis, 9th International  
Congress of Pharmacology, 3rd  Satellite Symposium on Cannabis.  England: IRL Pr. p. 22-30. 
Harvey DJ. 1990. Stability of  
cannabinoids in dried samples of  Cannabis dating from around 1896- 1905. J Ethnopharmacol 28:117-28. Hazekamp A. 2007. Cannabis;  
extracting the medicine. [Doctoral].  Leiden: Universiteit Leiden. p. 181. Hazekamp A. 2008-2009. Medicinal  use of Cannabis: a review. Leiden  (Netherlands): Hazekamp. 101 p. Health Canada. 2005. Drugs and health  products. Frequently asked questions  – medical use of marihuana. Ottawa  (ON): Health Canada. [Internet].  Access Date: 2014 Jul 2. Available  from: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/dhp mps/marihuana/about-apropos/ faq-eng.php  
Health Canada. 2012. Marihuana  medical access regulations. Ottawa  
(ON): Minister of Justice. Access  Date: 2014 Jul 2. Available from:  http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ahc-asc/ 
media/nr-cp/_2012/2012-193bka eng.php  
Hill AJ, Mercier MS, Hill TD, Glyn SE,  Jones NA, Yamasaki Y, Futamura  T, Duncan M, Stott CG, Stephens  
GJ. et al. 2012. Cannabidivarin is  anticonvulsant in mouse and rat  in vitro and in seizure models Br  J Pharmacol doi: 10.1111/j.1476- 5381.2012.02207.X. 
Hill AJ, Weston SE, Jones NA, Smith  I, Bevan SA, Williamson EM,  Stephens GJ, Williams CM, Whalley  BJ. 2010. Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin  suppresses in vitro epileptiform and  in vivo seizure activity in adult rats.  Epilepsia 51:1522-32. 
Hillig KW. 2004. A chemotaxonomic  analysis of terpenoid variation in  Cannabis. Biochem System Ecol  32:875-91. 
Hillig KW. 2005. Genetic evidence  for speciation in Cannabis 
(Cannabaceae). Genet Resour Crop  Evol 52:161-80. 
Hillig KW, Mahlberg PG. 2004.  A chemotaxonomic analysis of  cannabinoid variation in Cannabis (Cannabaceae). Am J Bot 91:966-75. 
Hofmann ME, Frazier CJ. 2013.  Marijuana, endocannabinoids, and  epilepsy: Potential and challenges for  improved therapeutic intervention.  Exper Neurol 244:43-50. 
Holland ML, Allen JD, Arnold  JC. 2008. Interaction of plant  cannabinoids with the multidrug  transporter ABCC1 (MRP1). Eur J  Pharmacol 591:128-31. 
Holley JH, Hadley KH, Turner E.  1975. Constituents of Cannabis  sativa L. XI: cannabidiol and  
cannabichromene in samples of  known geographical origin. J Pharm  Sci 64:892-4. 
Hollister LE. 1971. Hunger and  appetite after single doses  
of marihuana, alcohol, and  
dextroamphetamine. Clin Pharmacol  Ther 12:44-9. 
Howlett AC, Blume LC, Dalton GD.  2010. CB(1) cannabinoid receptors  and their associated proteins. Curr  Med Chem 17:1382-93. 
[ICH] International Conference on  Harmonization. 2011. Impurities:  guidelines for residual solvents:  International Conference on  
Harmonisation of Technical  
Requirements for Registration of  Pharmaceuticals for Human Use.  No. Q3C(R5). 25 p.  
[IMA] Israeli Medical Association.  2014. Medical marijuana regulations  approved by Israeli Cabinet. Tel  Aviv. [Internet]. Access Date: 2014  Jul 24. 1 p. Available from: http:// www.ima.org.il/ENG/ViewNew. 
aspx?NewId=1352  
Ito K, Ito M. 2013. The sedative effect  of inhaled terpinolene in mice and  its structure–activity relationships. J  Nat Med 67:833-7. 
Iuvone T, Esposito G, De Filippis  D, Scuderi C, Steardo Luca. 2009.  Cannabidiol: a promising drug for  neurodegenerative disorders? CNS  Neur Ther 15:65-75. 
Izzo AA, Borrelli F, Capasso R, Di  Marzo V, Mechoulam R. 2009. Non psychotropic plant cannabinoids:  new therapeutic opportunities from  an ancient herb. Trends Pharmacol  Sci 30:515-27. 
Izzo AA, Piscitelli F, Capasso R,  Aviello G, Romano B, Borrelli F,  Petrosino S, Di Marzo V. 2009.  Peripheral endocannabinoid  
dysregulation in obesity: relation  to intestinal motility and energy  processing induced by food  
deprivation and re-feeding. Br J  Pharmacol 158:451-61. 
Johnson JM, Lemberger L,  
Novotny M, Forney RB, Dalton  WS, Maskarinec MP. 1984.  
Pharmacological activity of the  basic fraction of marihuana  
whole smoke condensate alone  and in combination with Δ9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol in mice.  Toxicol App Pharmacol 72:440-8. Jones NA, Hill AJ, Smith I, Bevan SA,  Williams CM, Whalley BJ, Stephens  GJ. 2010. Cannabidiol displays  antiepileptiform and antiseizure  properties in vitro and in vivo. J  Pharmacol Exp Ther 332:569-77. Karlaganis G. 2002. SIDS initial  assessment report for SIAM 14:  Linalool. Berne: UNEP No. CAS  N°: 78-70-6. p. 157.  
Kavia R, De Ridder D, Constantinescu  CS, Stott CG, Fowler CJ. 2010.  Randomised controlled trial of  Sativex to treat detrusor over activity  in multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler  16:1349-59. 
Kisko G, Roller S. 2005. Carvacrol and  p-cymene inactivate Escherichia coli  O157:H7 in apple juice. BMC 5:36. 
Korte F, Haag M, Claussen U. 1965.  Tetrahydrocannabinolcarboxylic  acid, a component of hashish.  Angew Chem Int 4(872). 
Korte F, Sieper H. 1964a. On  the chemical classification of  
plants. XXIV. Investigation of  hashish constituents by thin-layer  chromatography. J Chromatog  13:90-8. 
Korte F, Sieper H. 1964b. On the  chemical classification of plants.  XXV. Quantitative determination  of hashish components by thin layer chromatography. J Chromatog  14:78-83. 
Kose EO, Deniz IG, Sarikurkcu C,  
Aktas O, Yavuz M. 2010. Chemical  composition, antimicrobial and  antioxidant activities of the essential  oils of Sideritis erythrantha Boiss.  and Heldr. (var. erythrantha and  var. cedretorum PH Davis) endemic  in Turkey. Food Chem Toxicol  48:2960-5. 
Kueppers FJEM, Lousberg RJJ,  Bercht CAL, Salemink CA, Terlow  JK, Heerma WM, Laven A. 1973.  Cannabis VIII. Pryolysis of  
cannabidiol. Structure elucidation  of the main pyrolytic product.  Tetrahedron 29:2797-802. 
Lakhan SE, Rowland M. 2009. Whole  plant Cannabis extracts in the  
treatment of spasticity in multiple  sclerosis: a systematic review. BMC  Neurology 9:59. 
Lamarck JB. 1785. Encyclopedique  methodique, Botanique I (part 2).  Paris: Panchoucke. Unknown p. 
Lata H, Bedir E, Hosick A, Ganzera  M, Khan I, Moraes RM. 2002.  In vitro plant regeneration from  leaf-derived callus in black cohosh  (Cimicifuga racemosa). Planta Med  68:912–5. 
Lata H, Chandra S, Khan I, ElSohly  MA. 2009b. Propagation through  alginate encapsulation of axillary  buds of Cannabis sativa L.–an  
important medicinal plant. Physiol  Mol Biol Plants 15:79–86. 
Lata H, Chandra S, Khan IA, ElSohly  MA. 2009a. Thidiazuron induced  high frequency direct shoot  
organogenesis of C. sativa L. In vitro  Cellular Dev Biology-Plant 45:12–9. Lata H, Chandra S, Khan IA , ElSohly  MA. 2010. High frequency plant  regeneration from leaf derived callus  of high Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol  yielding Cannabis sativa L. Planta Med  76:1629-33. 
Leandro LM, Vargas FDE S, Barbosa  PC, Neves JK, da Silva JA, da Veiga Junior VF. 2012. Chemistry and  biological activities of terpenoids  from copaiba (Copaifera spp.)  
oleoresins. Molecules 17:3866-89. Ligresti A, Moriello AS, Starowicz K,  Matias I, Pisanti S, De Petrocellis L,  Laezza C, Portella G, Bifulco M, Di  Marzo V. 2006. Antitumor activity  of plant cannabinoids with emphasis  on the effect of cannabidiol  
on human breast carcinoma. J  Pharmacol Exp Ther 318:1375-87. Linnaeus C. 1753. Species Plantarum  Stockholm: Salvius [facsimile edition,  1957–1959. Ray Society, London,  UK]. 1027 p. 
Loewe S. 1944. Studies on the  pharmacology of marihuana. In:  Committee L, editor. The marihuana  problem in the city of New York.  Lancaster (PA) Jaques Cattell Pr. p.  149-212  
Lorenzetti B, Souza G, Sarti S, Filho 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 60 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
D, Ferreira S. 1991. Myrcene mimics  the peripheral analgesic activity of  lemongrass tea. J Ethnopharmacol  34:43-8. 
Lousberg RJJ, Bercht CAL, Van  Ooyen R, Spronck HJW. 1977.  Cannabinodiol: conclusive  
identification and synthesis of a new  cannabinoid from Cannabis sativa. Phytochemistry 16:595-7. 
Machado Rocha FC, Stefano SC,  De Cassia Haiek R, Rosa Oliveira  LM, Da Silveira DX. 2008.  
Therapeutic use of Cannabis sativa on chemotherapy-induced nausea  and vomiting among cancer patients:  systematic review and meta-analysis.  Eur J Can Care 17:431-43. 
Maffei ME, Gertsch J, Appendino G.  2011. Plant volatiles: production,  function and pharmacology. Nat  Prod Rep 28:1359-80. 
Mahlberg PG, Turner J, Hemphill J,  Hammond C. 1984. Ultrastructure,  development and composition of  glandular trichomes of Cannabis.  In: Rodriguez P, Healey P, Mehta I,  editors. Biology and chemistry of  plant trichomes. NY: Pergamon p.  23-51. 
Makriyannis A, Tian X, Guo J. 2005.  How lipophilic cannabinergic ligands  reach their receptor sites. Prostag  Other Lipid Med 77:210-8. 
Malhotra S, Suri S, Tuli R. 2009.  Antioxidant activity of citrus  
cultivars and chemical composition  of Citrus karna essential oil. Planta  Med 75:62-4. 
Malingré T, Hendriks H, Batterman S,  Bos R, Visser J. 1975. The essential  oil of Cannabis sativa. Planta Med  28:56-61. 
Mandolino G, Ranalli P. 1999.  Advances in biotechnological  approaches for hemp breeding  and industry. In: Ranalli P, editor.  Advances in hemp research. New  York: Haworth. p. 185–208. 
Martin-Moreno AM, Reigada D,  Ramirez BG, Mechoulam R,  
Innamorato N, Cuadrado A, de  Ceballos ML. 2011. Cannabidiol and  other cannabinoids reduce microglial  activation in vitro and in vivo:  relevance to Alzheimer’s disease.  Mol Pharmacol 79:964-73. 
McHugh D, Hu SS, Rimmerman N,  Juknat A, Vogel Z, Walker JM,  Bradshaw HB. 2010. N-arachidonoyl  glycine, an abundant endogenous  lipid, potently drives directed  
cellular migration through GPR18,  the putative abnormal cannabidiol  receptor. BMC Neurosci 11:44. 
McLaren J, Swift W, Dillon P, Alllsop  S. 2008. Cannabis potency and  contamination: a review of the  literature. Addiction 103:1100-9. 
McPartland J. 2002. Contaminants  and adulterants in herbal Cannabis.  
Binghamton (NY): Haworth 337 p. McPartland JM. 1996. A review of  Cannabis diseases. J Int Hemp Assoc  3:19-23. 
McPartland JM. 2008. Adulteration  of Cannabis with tobacco, calamus,  and other cholinergic compounds.  Addict Biol 13:411-5. 
McPartland JM, Blanchon DJ,  Musty RE. 2008. Cannabimimetic  effects modulated by cholinergic  compounds. Addict Biol 13:411–5. 
McPartland JM, Clarke RC, Watson  DP. 2000. Hemp diseases and pests -  management and biological control.  Wallingford (UK): CABI 272 p. 
McPartland JM, Hillig KW. 2006.  Host-parasite relationships in  Cannabis. J Indus Hemp 10:85-104. 
McPartland JM, Mediavilla V. 2001.  Non-cannabinoids in cannabis.  In: Grotenhermen F, Russo EB,  
editors. Cannabis and annabinoids.  Binghamton (NY): Haworth Pr. McPartland JM, Pruitt PP. 1999.  Side effects of pharmaceuticals  not elicited by comparable  
herbal medicines: the case of  
tetrahydrocannabinol and marijuana.  Altern Therap 5:57-62. 
McPartland JM, Russo EB. 2001.  Cannabis and Cannabis extracts:  greater than the sum of their parts?  J Cann Ther 1:103-32. 
Mechoulam R. 1988. Alkloids in  Cannabis sativa L. Academic Pr.  77-93 p. 
Mechoulam R, Ben-Zvi Z,  
Yagnitinsky B, Shani A. 1969.  New tetrahydrocannabinolic acid.  Tetrahedron Lett. p. 2339–41. 
Mechoulam R, Gaoni Y. 1965.  Hashish. IV. Isolation and structure  of cannabinolic, cannabidiolic, and  cannabigerolic acids. Tetrahedron  21:1223-9. 
Mechoulam R, Gaoni Y. 1967. Recent  advances in the chemistry of  
hashish. Fortschr Chem Org Naturst  25:175-213. 
Mechoulam R, Hanuš L. 2002.  Cannabidiol: an overview of some  chemical and pharmacological  aspects. Part I: chemical aspects.  Chem Physics Lipids 121:35-43. 
Mechoulam R, Naftali L, Breuer  A, Zahalka J. 1990. Synthesis of  the individual, pharmacologically  distinct, enatiomers of a  
tetrahydroccannabinol derivative.  Tetrahedron Asymm 1:315-8. 
Mechoulam R, Parker LA, Gallily R.  2002. Cannabidiol: an overview of  some pharmacological aspects. J Clin  Pharmacol 42(11 Suppl):11S-19S. 
Mechoulam R, Shvo Y. 1963. Hashish.  I. Structure of cannabidiol.  
Tetrahedron Lett 19:2073–8. 
Mediavilla V, Steinemann S. 1997.  Essential oil of Cannabis sativa L.  
strains. J Int Hemp Assoc 4:80-2. Mehmedic Z, Chandra S, Slade D,  Denham H, Foster S, Patel AS, Ross  SA, Khan IA, ElSohly MA. 2010.  Potency trends of Δ9-THC and  other cannabinoids in confiscated  Cannabis preparations from 1993 to  2008. J Foren Sci 55:1209-17. 
[MHRA] Medicines and Healthcare  Products Regulatory Agency.  
2010. Public assessment report:  Sativex oromucosal spray  
UK/H/2462/001/DC. [Internet]:  MHRA. Access Date: 2014 Jul 2.  114 p. Available from: http://www. mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/par/ documents/websiteresources/ con084961.pdf  
Mikuriya TH, Aldrich MR. 1988.  Cannabis 1988. Old drug, new  dangers. The potency question. J  Psych Drugs 20:47-55. 
Mills E. 2011. Energy up in smoke.  The carbon footprint of indoor  cannabis production. [Internet].  
Access Date: 2014 Jul 2. 14 p.  Available from: http://evan-mills. com/energy-associates/Indoor.html.  
Mishima K, Hayakawa K, Abe K,  Ikeda T, Egashira N, Iwasaki K,  Fujiwara M. 2005. Cannabidiol  prevents cerebral infarction via a  serotonergic 5-hydroxytryptamine1A  receptor-dependent mechanism.  Stroke 36:1077-82. 
Miyazawa M, Watanabe H,  
Kameoka H. 1997. Inhibition of  acetylcholinesterase activity by  monoterpenoids with a p-methane  skeleton. J Agricult Food Chem  45:677-9. 
Mole ML, Turner CE. 1974.  
Phytochemical screening of Cannabis  sativa L. I. Constituents of an Indian  variant. J Pharmaceut Sci 63:154-6. 
Montford S, Small E. 1999. A  comparison of the biodiversity  friendliness of crops with special  reference to hemp (Cannabis sativa L.). J Intern Hemp Assoc 6:53-63. 
Morita M, Ando H. 1984. Analysis of  hashish oil by gas chromatography/ mass spectrometry. Kagaku Keisatsu  Kenkyusho Hokoku, Hokagaku-hen  37:137-40. 
Musty RE, Karniol IG, Shirikawa  I, Takahashi RN, Knobel  
E. 1976. Interactions of Δ9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol and  
cannabinol in man. In: Braude MC,  Szara S, editors. The pharmacology  of marihuana. New york: Raven Pr.  p. 559-63. 
Neff GW, O’Brien CB, Reddy KR,  Bergasa NV, Regev A, Molina E,  Amaro R, Rodriguez MJ, Chase V,  Jeffers L. et al. 2002. Preliminary  observation with dronabinol in  patients with intractable pruritus  secondary to cholestatic liver disease.  Am J Gastroenterol 97:2117–9. 
Nelson K, Walsh D, Deeter P, Sheehan  F. 1994. A phase II study of Δ9- tetrahydrocannabinol for appetite  stimulation in cancer-associated  anorexia. J Palliat Care 10:14-8. 
Newcome R. 2006. Dr Russell  Newcome on the ACMD report on  Cannabis. [Internet]. Access Date:  2014 Jul 14. Available from: http:// www.lifelineproject.co.uk/Dr Russell-Newcome-on-the-ACMD report-on-cannabis_25.php  
[NIDA] National Institute Drug  Abuse. 1998. Provision of marijuana  and other compounds for scientific  research - recommendations of  The National Institute on Drug  Abuse National Advisory Council.  Rockville (MD): National Institute  of Health. [Internet]. Access  
Date: 2014 Jul 24. p. 6. Available  from: http://archives.drugabuse. gov/about/organization/nacda/ MarijuanaStatement.html  
[NIDA] National Institute Drug  Abuse. 2012. Spice (synthetic  marijuana). [Internet]. Access Date:  2014 Jul 10. p. 1-2. Available from:  www.drugabuse.gov  
Noma Y, Asakawa Y. 2010.  
Biotransformation of  
monoterpenoids by microorganisms,  insects, and mammals. In: Baser  KHC, Buchbauer G, editors.  
Handbook of essential oils:  
science,technology, and applications.  Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press. p.  585–736. 
Obata Y, Ishikawa Y. 1966.  
Constituents of hemp plant  
(Cannabis sativa) III. Isolation of  a Gibbs-positive compound from  Japanese hemp. Agr Biol Chem 30:  619-20. 
[OMC] Office of Medicinal Cannabis.  2003. Guidelines for cultivating  Cannabis for medicinal purposes  [Voorschriften voor de Verbouw  van Cannabis voor Medicinale  Doeleinden] J Cann Ther 3:51-61. [OMC] Office of Medicinal  
Cannabis. 2011. Medicinal cannabis  information for patients. The Hague  (The Netherlands): Institute for  Responsible Medicine Use and the  Office of Medicinal Cannabis of the  CIBG, Ministry of Health, Welfare  and Sport. [Internet]. Access Date:  2014 Jul 24. p. 16 Available from:  http://www.cannabisbureau.nl/en/ doc/pdf/5089-A5-BMC-Pat-ENG web_25097.pdf  
Ortiz de Urbina AV, Martín ML,  Montero MJ, Morán A, San Román  L. 1989. Sedating and antipyretic  activity of the essential oil of  
Calamintha sylvatica subsp. ascendens. J  Ethnopharmacol 25:165-71. 
Pagani A, Scala F, Chianese G, Grassi  G, Appendino G, Tagliateli-Scafati  O. 2011. Cannabioxepane, a novel 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 61 
tetracyclic cannabinoid from hemp,  Cannabis sativa L. Tetrahedron  67:3369-73. 
Pate D. 1994. Chemical ecology of  Cannabis. J Inter Hemp Assoc 2:32-7. Peana AT, De Montis MG, Sechi S,  Sircana G, D’Aquila PS, Pippia  P. 2004. Effects of (-)-linalool in  the acute hyperalgesia induced  by carrageenan, L-glutamate and  prostaglandin E2. Eur J Pharmacol  497:279-84. 
Perry N, Court G, Bidet N, Court  J, Perry E. 1996. European herbs  with cholinergic activity: potential  in dementia therapy. Inter J Geriatr  Psych 11:1063-9. 
Perry NSL, Houghton PJ, Theobald  A, Jenner P, Perry EK. 2000.  
In-vitro inhibition of human  
erythrocyte acetylcholinesterase by  Salvia lavandulaefolia essential oil  and constituent terpenes. J Pharm  Pharmacol 52:895-902. 
Persson M, Sjodin K, Borg-Karlson  AK, Norin T, Ekberg I. 1996.  Relative amounts and enantiomeric  compostitions of monoterpene  hydrocarbons in xylem and needles  of Picea abies Phytochemistry  
42:1289-97. 
Pertwee RG. 2008. The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology  of three plant cannabinoids: Δ9- tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol  and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin. Br J  Pharmacol 153:199-215. 
Pertwee RG, Howlett AC, Abood  ME, Alexander SPH, Di Marzo V,  Elphick MR, Greasley PJ, Hansen  HS, Kunos G, Mackie K. et al. 2010.  International Union of Basic and  Clinical Pharmacology. LXXIX.  Cannabinoid receptors and their  ligands: beyond CB1 and CB2.  Pharmacol Rev Pharmacol Rev  62:588–631. 
Pertwee RG, Thomas A, Stevenson  LA, Ross RA, Varvel SA, Lichtman  AH, Martin BR, Razdan RK. 2007.  The psychoactive plant cannabinoid,  Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, is  
antagonized by Δ8- and Δ9- 
tetrahydrocannabivarin in mice in  vivo. Br J Pharmacol 150:586-94. Petrzilka T, Haefliger W, Sikemeier  C. 1969. Synthesis of hashish  components. IV. Helvet Chim Acta  52:1102-34. 
Pitts JE, Neal JD, Gough TA. 1992.  Some features of Cannabis plants  grown in the United Kingdom from  seeds of known origin. J Pharm  Pharmacol 44:947-51. 
Pollastro F, Taglialatela-Scafati O,  Allara M, Munoz E, Di Marzo V, De  Petrocellis L, Appendino G. 2011.  Bioactive prenylogous cannabinoid  from fiber hemp (Cannabis sativa). J  Nat Prod 74:2019-22. 
Potter D. 2004. Growth and  
morphology of medicinal Cannabis.  In: Guy GW, Whittle BA, Robson  PJ, editors. The medicinal uses of  Cannabis and cannabinoids. London:  Pharmaceut Pr. p. 17-54. 
Potter D. 2009. The propagation,  characterisation and optimisation  of Canabis sativa L. as a  
phytopharmaceutical. London:  King’s College London. p. 110. Potter DJ, Duncombe P. 2012. The  
effect of electrical lighting power  and irradiance on indoor-grown  cannabis potency and yield. J  
Forensic Sci 57:618-22. 
[ProCon.org]. 2014. Who are the  patients receiving medical marijuana  through the federal government’s  Compassionate IND Program?  [Internet]. Access Date: 2014  
Jul 24. Available from: http:// medicalmarijuana.procon.org/view. answers.php?questionID=000257 
Qin N, Neeper MP, Liu Y, Hutchinson  TL, Lubin ML, Flores CM. 2008.  TRPV2 is activated by cannabidiol  and mediates CGRP release in  cultured rat dorsal root ganglion  neurons. J Neurosci 28:6231-8. 
Radwan MM, ElSohly MA, Slade  D, Ahmed SA, Khan IA, Ross  SA. 2009. Biologically active  
cannabinoids from high-potency  Cannabis sativa. J Nat Prod 72:906- 11. 
Radwan MM, ElSohly MA, Slade D,  Ahmed SA, Wilson L, El-Alfy AT,  Khan IA, Ross SA. 2008a. Non cannabinoid constituents from a  high potency Cannabis sativa variety.  Phytochemistry 69:2627–33. 
Radwan MM, Ross SA, Slade D,  Ahmed SA, Zulfiqar F, ElSohly MA.  2008b. Isolation and characterization  of new Cannabis constituents from  a high potency variety. Planta Med  74:267–72. 
Rahn EJ, Hohmann AG. 2009.  Cannabinoids as pharmacotherapies  for neuropathic pain: from  
the bench to the bedside.  
Neurotherapeutics 6:713-37. 
Raman A. 1998. The Cannabis plant:  botany, cultivation, and processing  for use. In: Brown DT, editor.  Cannabis – The genus Cannabis Amsterdam: Harwood Acad. p.  32-57. 
Randerson J. 2007. Warning issued  over Cannabis adulterated with glass  beads. [Internet]. Access Date: 2014  Jul 28. Available from: http://www. theguardian.com/society/2007/ jan/12/drugsandalcohol.drugs  
Rao VS, Menezes AM, Viana GS.  1990. Effect of myrcene on  
nociception in mice. J Pharm  
Pharmacol 42:877-8. 
Resstel LB, Tavares RF, Lisboa SF, Joca  SR, Correa FM, Guimaraes FS. 2009.  5-HT1A receptors are involved in  
the cannabidiol-induced attenuation  of behavioural and cardiovascular  responses to acute restraint stress in  rats. Br J Pharmacol 156:181-8. Reuter PH. 2010. Marijuana  
legalization: What can be learned  from other countries? Santa Monica  (CA): Rand Drug Policy Research  Center. [Internet]. Access Date: 2014  Jul 28. Available from: http://www. rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/ working_papers/2010/RAND_ WR771.pdf  
Riyazi A, Hensel A, Bauer K, Geissler  N, Schaff S, EJ V. 2007. The effect  of the volatile oil from ginger  rhizomes (Zingiber officinale), its  fractions and isolated compounds  on the 5-HT3 receptor complex and  the serotoninergic system of the rat  ileum. Planta Med 73:355-62. 
Rock EM, Goodwin JM, Limebeer CL,  Breuer A, Pertwee RG, Mechoulam  R, Parker LA. 2010. Interaction  between non-psychotropic  
cannabinoids in marihuana: effect  of cannabigerol (CBG) on the  anti-nausea or anti-emetic effects  of cannabidiol (CBD) in rats and  shrews. Psychopharmacology  215:505-12. 
Rog DJ, Nurmiko T, Friede T, Young  C. 2005. Randomized controlled  trial of Cannabis based medicine  
in central neuropathic pain due  to multiple sclerosis. Neurology  65:812-9. 
Rosenthal E. 2010. Ed Rosenthal’s  marijuana grower’s handbook.  Oakland (CA): Quick American  510 p. 
Rosmarin A, Eastwood N. 2012.  A quiet revolution: drug  
decriminalisaton policies in practice  across the globe. UK: Release.  [Internet]. Access Date: 2014 Jul 2.  44 p. Available from: http://www. release.org.uk/sites/release.org.uk/ files/pdf/publications/Release_ Quiet_Revolution_2013.pdf  
Ross SA, ElSohly MA. 1996. The  volatile oil composition of fresh and  air-dried buds of Cannabis sativa L. J  Nat Prod 59:49-51. 
Ross SA, ElSohly MA. 1999. CBN  and Δ9-THC concentration ratio as  an indicator of the age of stored  marijuana samples. Bull Narc 49- 50:139–47. 
Ross SA, ElSohly MA, Sultana GNN,  Mehmedic Z, Hossain CF, Chandra  S. 2005. Flavonoid glycosides and  cannabinoids from the pollen of  Cannabis sativa L. Phytochem Anal  16:45-8. 
Russo E. 2004. History of Cannabis  as a medicine. In: Guy GW,  
Whittle BA, Robson PJ, editors.  The medicinal uses of Cannabis  and cannabinoids. London:  
Pharmaceutical. p. 1-16. 
Russo EB. 2011. Taming THC:  potential Cannabis synergy and  phytocannabinoid-terpenoid  
entourage effects. Brit J Pharmacol  163:1344-64. 
Russo EB, Burnett A, Hall B, Parker  KK. 2005. Agonistic properties of  cannabidiol at 5-HT1a receptors.  Neurochem Res 30:1037-43. 
Russo EB, Guy GW, Robson PJ. 2007.  Cannabis, pain, and sleep; lessons  from therapeutic clinical trials of  
Sativex, a cannabis-based medicine.  Chem Biodiver 4:1729-43. 
Samuelsson G. 1992. Drugs of natural  origin. Stockholm: Swedish Pharm  Pr. 320 p. 
Schultes RE, Klein WT, Plowman T,  Lockwood TE. 1974. Cannabis: An  example of taxonomic neglect. Harv  Univ Bot Mus Leaf 23:337-67. 
Scuderi C, De Filippis D, Iuvone T,  Blasio A, Steardo A, Esposito G.  2009. Cannabidiol in medicine: a  review of its therapeutic potential  
in CNS disorders. Phytother Res  23:597-602. 
Shani A, Mechoulam R. 1970. A new  type of cannabinoid. Synthesiss  of cannabielsoic acid A by a novel  photo-oxidative cyclization. J Chem  Soc D:273-4. 
Shani A, Mechoulam R. 1974.  Cannabielsoic acids. Isolation  and synthesis by a novel oxidative  cyclization. Tetrahedron 30 2437-46. 
Shi G, Cai Q. 2009. Cadmium  tolerance and accumulation in  eight potential energy crops.  
Biotechnology Advances 27:555- 561. 
Shoyama Y, Fujita T, Yamauchi T,  Nishioka I. 1968. Cannabis. II.  Cannabichromenic acid, a genuine  substance of cannabichromene.  Chem Pharmaceut Bull 16:1157-8. 
Shoyama Y, Kuboe K, Nishioka I,  Yamauchi T. 1972a. Cannabis. VII.  Cannabidiol monomethyl ether.  New neutral cannabinoid. Chem  Pharmaceut Bull 20:2072. 
Shoyama Y, Morimoto S, Nishioka  I. 1981. Cannabis. XIV. Two  
new propyl cannabinoids,  
cannabicyclovarin and Δ7-cis-iso tetrahydrocannabivarin, from Thai  Cannabis. Chem Pharmaceut Bull  29:3720–3. 
Shoyama Y, Oku R, Yamauchi T,  Nishioka I. 1972b. Cannabis.  
VI. Cannabicyclolic acid. Chem  Pharmaceut Bull 20:1927-30. 
Siegel BZ, Garnier L, Siegel SM. 1988.  Mercury in marijuana. BioScience  38:619-623. 
Sirikantaramas S, Morimoto S,  Shoyama Y, Ishikawa Y, Wada  Y, Shoyama Y, Taura F. 2004.  
Enzyme catalysis and regulation:  The gene controling mariujuana 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 62 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 
psychoactivity; Molecular cloing and  heterologous expression of Δ1- tetrahydrocannabinolic acid synthase  from Cannabis sativa L. J Biol Chem  279:39767-74. 
Sirikantaramas S, Taura F, Morimoto  S, Shoyama Y. 2007. Recent  
advances in Cannabis sativa research:  biosynthetic studies and its potential  in biotechnology. Curr Pharmaceut  Biotechnol 8:237-43. 
Slusarkiewicz-Jarzina A, Ponitka A,  Kaczmarek Z. 2005. Influence of  cultivar, explant source and plant  growth regulator on callus induction  
and plant regeneration of Cannabis  sativa L. Acta Biol Craco Ser Bot  47:145–51. 
Small E. 1979. The species problem in  Cannabis. Toronto: Corp Infor Serv  Lim. 218 p. 
Small E. 1997. Cannabis. New York:  Oxford Univ Pr. 616 p. 
Small E. 2007. Cannabis as a source  of medicinals, nutraceuticals, and  functional foods. In: Acharya SN,  Thomas JE, editors. Advances  in medicinal plant research.  
Trivandrum (India): Research  Signpost. p. 1-39. 
Small E, Beckstead HD. 1973.  Common cannabinoid phenotypes  in 350 stocks of Cannabis. Lloydia  36:144-165. 
Small E, Cronquist A. 1976. A  practical and natural taxonomy for  Cannabis. Taxon 25:405-35. 
Small E, Marcus D. 2002. Hemp: A  new crop with new uses for North  America. In: Janick J, Whipkey A,  editors. Trends in new crops and  new uses. Alexandria (VA): ASHS  Pr. p. 284-326. 
Smith RM, Kempfert KD. 1977.  Δ1-3,4-cis-Tetrahydrocannabinol  in Cannabis sativa Phytochemistry  16:1088-9. 
Souto-Maior FN, de Carvalho FL, de  Morais LC, Netto SM, de Sousa DP,  de Almeida RN. 2011. Anxiolytic like effects of inhaled linalool oxide  in experimental mouse anxiety  models. Pharmacol Biochem Behav  100:259-63. 
[SPI] Siddha Pharmacopoeia India.  2008. The Siddha Pharmacopoeia  of India. New Delhi Siddha  
Pharmacopoeia Committee,  
Department of Ayurveda, Yoga &  Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and  Homoeopathy (AYUSH), Ministry  of Health & Family Welfare,  
Government of India. 
Stafford ML. 2013. The quiet giant:  Israel’s discreet and successful  medicinal Cannabis program.  
HerbalGram 97:38-45. 
Stahl E, Kunde R. 1973. Die  
Leitsubstanzen der Haschisch Suchhunde. Leading substances for  
hashish narcotic dogs. Kriminalistik  9: 385-8. 
Starks M. 1990. Marijuana chemistry  – genetics, processing, and potency.  Berkeley: Ronin. 191 p. 
State of Israel Prime Minister’s  Office. 2011. Cabinet approves  arrangements for the use of  
cannabis for medical purposes.  [Internet]. Access Date:  
2014 Jul 28. Available from:  
http://stopthedrugwar.org/ 
chronicle/2011/aug/07/israel_ cabinet_approves_medical  
Stevens PF. 2001. Cannabaceae  [Internet]. Access Date: Nov 22  2013. Available from: http://www. mobot.org/mobot/research/ 
apweb/orders/rosalesweb. 
htm#Cannabaceae 
Stroup K. 2014. Despite legalization,  thousands of Americans still go  to jail–and need lawyers to defend  them [Internet]. Marijuana.com.  Available from: http://marijuana. com/news/2014/07/despite 
legalization-thousands-of-americans still-go-to-jail-and-need-lawyers-to defend-them/ 
Sun J. 2007. D-Limonene: safety and  clinical applications. Altern Med Rev  12:259-64. 
Suurkuusk G. 2010. Validation of the  gas chromatographic method for  THC, CBD and CBN determination.  [Masters]. Tartu, Estonia: University  of Tartu. p. 40. 
Swift W, Wong A, Li KM, Arnoldd  JC, McGregor LS. 2013. Analysis of  Cannabis seizures in NSW, Australia:  Cannabis potency and cannabinoid  profile. PLOS One 8:e70052. 
Swissmedic. 2013a. The way  
to the Cannabis medication.  
Bern: Swissmedic, Division  
Complementary Herbal Medicines.  [Internet]. Access Date: 2014 Jul  11. 17 p. Available from: http:// www.stcm.ch/files/presentation_ tschuemperlin.pdf  
Swissmedic. 2013b. Zulassung eines  Arzneimittels mit neuem Wirkstoff:  Sativex®, spray zur Anwendung in  der Mundhöhle (Cannabis sativae  folii cum flore extractum spissum).  Swissmedic J:945-1065. 
Tambe Y, Tsujiuchi H, Honda G,  Ikeshiro Y, Tanaka S. 1996. Gastric  cytoprotection of the non-steroidal  anti-inflammatory sesquiterpene,  beta-caryophyllene. Planta Med  62:469-70. 
Taura F, Morimoto S, Shoyama Y.  1995a. Cannabinerolic acid, a  
cannabinoid from Cannabis sativa. Phytochemistry 39:457–8. 
Taura F, Morimoto S, Shoyama  Y. 1996. Purification and  
characterization of cannabidiolic acid synthase from Cannabis sativa 
L. Biochemical analysis of a  
novel enzyme that catalyzes the  oxidocyclization of cannabigerolic  acid to cannabidiolic acid. J Biol  Chem 271:17411-6. 
Taura F, Morimoto S, Shoyama Y,  Mechoulam R. 1995b. First direct  evidence for the mechanism of  Δ1-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid  biosynthesis. J Am Chem Soc  117:9766-7. 
Thomas A, Baillie GL, Phillips AM,  Razdan RK, Ross RA, Pertwee  RG. 2007. Cannabidiol displays  
unexpectedly high potency as an  antagonist of CB1 and CB2 receptor  agonists in vitro. Br J Pharmacol  150:613-23. 
Thomas A, Stevenson LA, Wease  KN, Price MR, Baillie G, Ross  RA, Pertwee RG. 2005. Evidence  that the plant cannabinoid Δ9- 
tetrahydrocannabivarin is a  
cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptor  antagonist. Br J Pharmacol 146:917- 26. 
Tubaro A, Giangaspero A, Sosa  S, Negri R, Grassi G, Casano  
S, Della Loggia R, Appendino  G. 2010. Comparative topical  
anti- inflammatory activity of  
cannabinoids and cannabivarins.  Fitoterapia 81:816-9. 
Turner CE. 1983. Cannabis: the plant,  its drugs, and their effects. Aviat  Space Environ Med:363-8. 
Turner CE, Elsohly MA.  
1981. Biological activity of  
cannabichromene, its homologs and  isomers. J Clin Pharmacol 21(8-9  Suppl):283S-291S. 
Turner CE, Elsohly MA, Boeren EG.  1980b. Constituents of Cannabis  sativa L. XVII. A review of the  natural constituents. J Nat Prod  43:169-304. 
Turner CE, Hsu MH, Knapp JE,  Schiff PL Jr, Slatkin DJ. 1976.  Isolation of cannabisativine, an  alkaloid, from Cannabis sativa L. root.  J Pharm Sci 65:1084-5. 
Turner CE, Mole ML, Hanus L,  Elsohly HN. 1981. Constituents  of Cannabis sativa L. XIX. Isolation  and structure elucidation of  
cannabiglendol. A novel cannabinoid  from an Indian variant. J Nat Prod  44:27-33. 
Turner J, Hemphill J, Mahlberg PG.  1980a. Trichomes and cannabinoid  content in developing leaves  
and bracts of Cannabis sativa L.  (Cannabaceae) Amer J Bot 67:1397- 406. 
U.S. Department of State. 2014. Learn  about your destination. [Internet].  Access Date: 2014 Jul 2. Available  from: http://travel.state.gov/ 
content/passports/english/country. html  
United Nations. 1973. Single  
convention on narcotic drugs 1961  (as amended by the 1972 protocol  amending the Single Convention  on Narcotic Drugs, 1961). Geneva:  United Nations. [Internet]. Access  Date: 2014 Jul 2. Available from:  http://www.unodc.org/pdf/ 
convention_1961_en.pdf  
United Nations. 2013a. Status as at:  15-01-2013: Single convention  on narcotic drugs, 1961.  
Herndon (VA): United Nations.  [Internet]. Access Date: 2014 Jul  2. Available from: http://treaties. un.org/Pages/ViewDetails. 
aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=VI 15&chapter=6&lang=en  
United Nations. 2013b. Status as at:  15-01-2013: Protocol amending  the Single Convention on Narcotic  Drugs 1961. Herndon (VA):  
United Nations. Access Date:  2014 Jul 2. Available from: http:// treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails. aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=VI 17&chapter=6&lang=en  
[UNODC] United Nations Office on  Drugs and Crime. 2006. World Drug  Report. United Nations Office on  Drugs and Crime. Vienna: Vienna  International Center.  
[UNODC] United Nations Office  on Drugs and Crime. 2009.  
Recommended methods for the  identification and analysis of  
Cannabis and Cannabis products  Vienna: United Nations Office on  Drugs and Crime. [Internet]. Access  Date: 2014 Jul 2. 60 p. Available  from: http://www.unodc.org/ documents/scientific/ST-NAR-40- Ebook.pdf  
[UNODC] United Nations Office on  Drugs and Crime. 2011. World Drug  Report 2011. New York: United  Nations. 266 p.  
[UNODC] United Nations office on  drugs and crime. 2014. World drug  report. New York: United Nations.  [Internet]. Access Date: 2014 Jul24.  
128 p. Available from: http://www. unodc.org/documents/wdr2014/ World_Drug_Report_2014_web.pdf  
[UPI] Unani Pharmacopoeia India.  2007. The Unani Pharmacopoeia  of India. New Delhi (India): The  Unani Pharmacopoeia Committee,  
Department of Ayurveda, Yoga &  Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and  Homoeopathy (AYUSH), Ministry  of Health & Family Welfare,  
Government of India  
Uruguay. 2013. Poder Legislativo.  Uruguay. [Internet] No. Ley No.  19.172. Access Date: 2014 Jul  28. 24 p. Available from: http:// archivo.presidencia.gub.uy/sci/ leyes/2013/12/cons_min_803.pdf  
[USC] United States Code. 2010.  Title 21 food and drugs, Chapter 
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 63 
13 drug abuse prevention and  control, subchapter I control and  enforcement, Part A introductory  provisions, section 802 definitions.  Washington (DC): Office of the Law  Revision Counsel of the U.S. House  of Representatives. [Internet].  Access Date: 2014 Jul 24. Available  from: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/ pkg/USCODE-2010-title21/pdf/ USCODE-2010-title21-chap13- subchapI-partA-sec802.pdf  
[USP 30-NF 25] United States  Pharmacopoeia 30- National  
Formulary 25. 2007. Residual  
solvents. Rockville (MD): United  States Pharmacopoeial Convention. Valle JR, Vieira JEV, Aucélio JG,  Valio IFM. 1978. Influence of  photoperiodism on cannabinoid  content of C. sativa L. Bull Narc  30:67–8. 
Van Ginneken CAM, Vree TB,  Breimer DD, Thijssen HWH, Van  Rossum JM. 1972. Cannabinodiol,  a new hashish constituent,  
identified by gas chromatography mass spectrometry. In: Frigerio  A, editor. Proceedings of the  
International Symposium on  
Gas Chromatography Mass  
Spectrometry. Isle of Elba Milano  (Italy): Tamburini. p. 109-29. 
Vanhoenacker G, Van Rompaey  P, De Keukeleire D, Sandra P.  2002 Chemotaxonomic features  associated with flavonoids of  
cannabinoid-free Cannabis (Cannabis  sativa subsp. sativa L.) in relation to  hops (Humulus lupulus L.). Nat Prod  Lett 16:57-63. 
Veress T, Szanto JI, Leisztner L. 1990.  Determination of cannabinoid  acids by high-performance liquid  chromatography of their neutral  derivatives formed by thermal  decarboxylation in an open reactor. J  Chromatogr A 520:339-47. 
Verhoeckx KCM, Korthout HAAJ,  van Meeteren-Kreikamp AP, Ehlert  KA, Wang M, van der Greef J,  Rodenburg RJT, Witkamp RF. 2006.  Unheated Cannabis sativa extracts  and its major compound THC-acid  have potential immuno-modulating  properties not mediated by CB1 and  CB2 receptor coupled pathways. Int  Immunopharmacol 6:656-65. 
Veszki P, Verzár-Petri G, Mészáros S.  1980. Comparative phytochemical  study on the cannabinoid  
composition of the geographical  varieties of Cannabis sativa L.  under the same condition. Herba  Hungarica 19:95-102. 
Volicer L, Stelly M, Morris J,  
McLaughlin J, Volicer BJ. 1997.  Effects of dronabinol on anorexia  and disturbed behavior in patients  with Alzheimer’s disease. Int J  Geriatr Psychiatry 12(9):913-9. 
Vollner L, Bieniek D, Korte F. 1969.  Hashish. XX. Cannabidivarin, a new  hashish constituent. Tetrahedron  Lett 3:145-7. 
Von Spulak F, Claussen U, Fehlhaber  HW, Korte F. 1968. Hashish.  
XIX. Tetrahydrocannabitriol  
cannabidiolcarboxylic acid ester,  a new constituent of hashish.  Tetrahedron 24:5379-83. 
Vree TB, Breimer DD, Van Ginneken  CA, Van Rossum JM. 1972.  
Identification of cannabicyclol  with a pentyl or propyl side 
chain by means of combined gas  chromatography-mass spectrometry.  J Chromatog 74:124-7. 
Wang R, He LS, Xia B, Tong JF, Li N,  Peng F. 2009. A micropropagation  system of cloning of hemp  
(Cannabis sativa L.) by shoot tip  culture. Pak J Bot 41:603-8. 
Wargent ET, Zaibi MS, Silvestri  C, Hislop DC, Stocker CJ, Stott  CG, Guy GW, Duncan M,  
Di Marzo V, Cawthorne MA.  
2013. The cannabinoid Δ9- 
tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV)  ameliorates insulin sensititity in  tw muse models of obesity. Nutr  Diabetes doi: 10.1038/nutd.2013.9. 
Wilkinson JD, Williamson EM.  2007. Cannabinoids inhibit human  keratinocyte proliferation through a  non-CB1/CB2 mechanism and have  a potential therapeutic value in the  treatment of psoriasis. J Dermatol  Sci 45:87–92. 
Williams SJ, Hartley JPR, Graham JDP.  1976. Bronchodilator effect of Δ1- tetrahydrocannabinol administered  
by aerosol to asthmatic patients.  Thorax 31:720-3. 
Wirth PW, Watson ES, ElSohly M,  Turner CE, Murphy JC. 1980.  Anti-inflammatory properties of  cannabichromene. Life Sci 26:1991- 5. 
Woelkart K, Salo-Ahen OM, Bauer  R. 2008. CB receptor ligands  
from plants. Curr Top Med Chem  8(3):173-86. 
Wood TB, Spivey WTN, Easterfield  TH. 1896. Charas. The resin  
of Indian hemp. J Chem Soc  
Transactions 69:539-46. 
Xi ZX, Peng XQ, Li X, Zhang H,  Li JG, Gardner EL. 2010. Brain  cannabinoid CB2 receptors inhibit  cocaine self-administration and  cocaine-enhanced extracellular  dopamine in mice. Proceedings  20th Annual Symposium on the  Cannabinoids. Lund: Internatioanl  Cannabinoid Research Socity. p. 32. 
Yamamoto I, Gohda H, Narimatsu S,  Yoshimura H. 1988. Identification  of cannabielsoin, a new metabolite  of cannabidiol formed by guinea-pig  hepatic microsomal enzymes, and its  pharmacological activity in mice. J  
Pharmacobiodyn 11:833-8. 
Yamauchi T, Shoyama Y, Matsuo Y,  Nishioka I. 1968. Cannabis. III.  Cannabigerol monomethyl ether,  a new component of hemp. Chem  Pharm Bull 16:1164-5. 
Yanauchi T, Shoyama Y, Aramaki  H, Azuma T, Nishioka I.  
1967. Tetrahydrocannabinolic  acid, a genuine substance of  
tetrahydrocannabinol. Chem Pharm  Bull 15:1075-6. 
Zuardi AW, Guimaraes FS, Guimaraes  VM, Del Beni EA. 2002.  
Cannabidiol: possible therapeutic  application. In: Grotenhermen  F, Russo E, editors. Cannabis and  cannabinoides: pharmacology,  toxicology and therapeutic potential.  New York: Psychology Pr. p. 359-69. 
Zuardi AW, Hallak JE, Dursun SM,  Morais SL, Sanches RF, Musty  RE, Crippa JA. 2006. Cannabidiol  monotherapy for treatment-resistant  schizophrenia. J Psychopharmacol  20:683-86.
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® 64 • Cannabis Inflorescence • 2014 

Female cannabis plant 
Source: Elizabeth Blackwell, Herbarium Blackwellianum (1757). Courtesy of the Lloyd Library and Museum, Cincinatti, OH.
American Herbal Pharmacopoeia® PO Box 66809 
Scotts Valley, CA 95067 
Tel: 831-461-6318 
Fax: 831-438-2196 
Website: www.herbal-ahp.org 
Email: ahp@herbal-ahp.org