Handbook of Cannabis

Handbooks in Psychopharmacology
Series Editor: Professor Les Iversen

Handbook of Cannabis
Edited by

Roger G. Pertwee
Institute of Medical Sciences
University of Aberdeen, UK

1

1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
Chapters 1–38 and 40 © Oxford University Press 2014
Chapter 39 © European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction 2010
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First Edition published in 2014
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014942674
ISBN 978–0–19–966268–5
Printed and bound by
CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
Oxford University Press makes no representation, express or implied, that the
drug dosages in this book are correct. Readers must therefore always check
the product information and clinical procedures with the most up-to-date
published product information and data sheets provided by the manufacturers
and the most recent codes of conduct and safety regulations. The authors and
the publishers do not accept responsibility or legal liability for any errors in the
text or for the misuse or misapplication of material in this work. Except where
otherwise stated, drug dosages and recommendations are for the non-pregnant
adult who is not breast-feeding
Author’s contribution to the Work was done as part of the Author’s official duties
as an NIH employee and is a Work of the United States Government. Therefore,
copyright may not be established in the United States (Chapters 1, 9, 16, and 31).
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.

Dedication
for Teresa

Foreword: Beyond THC and Anandamide

One of the most appealing features of scientific research is the promise of discovery of unexpected
new facets of our surroundings or even of our own world.
The original aim of cannabis research—like that of morphine, about a century earlier—was
to identify the active principle and to make it available for biological and clinical investigations.
Indeed, this type of research, which had started in the late nineteenth century, culminated in the
1960s and early 1970s with the elucidation of the chemistry of specific cannabis constituents,
which were termed cannabinoids. Although many dozens of plant cannabinoids are now known,
surprisingly, there is essentially only one compound, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), which
causes the typical “marijuana” effects, although others, such as cannabidiol (CBD), modify its
activity. Unexpectedly, the exciting saga of cannabinoid research did not end here, but led to
further discoveries of wider importance. THC turned out to be an agonist to two major new
receptors, which had their own endogenous agonists—anandamide and 2-arachidonoyl glycerol
(2-AG). These endocannabinoids have complicated biosynthetic and degradation pathways. This
elaborate new biochemical system, appropriately named the endocannabinoid system, has turned
out to be of central importance in physiology. It has both direct biological effects, and effects due
to modulation of other neurotransmitter systems. In fact the endocannabinoids are synthesized,
when and where needed, in the postsynapse and move to the presynapse, where they affect the
release of many of the major known neurotransmitters (Howlett et al. 2002; Pertwee et al. 2010).
The present book, edited by Roger Pertwee, one of the early pioneers in the area, presents a
picture of our knowledge of the endocannabinoid field, with emphasis on the major biological systems in which the endocannabinoids are involved, with parts dealing with a wide spectrum of topics, stretching from history and international control, through chemistry and pharmacology, to
clinical use and clinical promise. The roles of the endocannabinoid system in many central physiological mechanisms are emphasized. It gives us an almost complete picture of the present-day
state of knowledge. But a final picture is never possible. There are already tiny slivers of published,
unexplained facts, which will presumably open new vistas of which we are not fully aware today.
Just two examples:
Endocannabinoids and synthetic molecules acting through the type 2 cannabinoid receptor
(CB2) have been shown to affect a large number of pathological conditions—cardiovascular, neurodegenerative, reproductive, gastrointestinal, liver, lung, skeletal, and even psychiatric and cancer diseases. This receptor works in conjunction with the immune system and presumably with
various other physiological systems. It seems that the CB2 receptor is part of a major general protective entity. We are, of course, aware that the mammalian body has a highly developed immune
system, whose main role is to guard against protein attack and prevent, reduce, or repair possible
injury. It is inconceivable that through evolution analogous biological protective systems have not
been developed against nonprotein attacks. Pál Pacher and I have previously posed the speculative
question: “Are there mechanisms through which our body lowers the damage caused by various
types of neuronal as well as non-neuronal insults? The answer is of course positive. Through
evolution numerous protective mechanisms have evolved to prevent and limit tissue injury. We
believe that lipid signaling through CB2 receptors is a part of such a protective machinery and

FOREWORD ﻿

CB2 receptor stimulation leads mostly to sequences of activities of a protective nature” (Pacher
and Mechoulam 2011).
In addition to anandamide and 2-AG there are many dozens, possibly hundreds, of chemically
related compounds in the brain and possibly in the periphery. They are mostly fatty acid amides of
amino acids (FAAAs) or of ethanol amines, or glycerol esters of fatty acids. More than 50 years ago
Godel, in his philosophical work, suggested that everything in the world has meaning, which is
analogous to the principle that everything has a cause, on which most of science rests. Along this
line of thought: do these compounds play a physiological role? Those constituents that have been
evaluated do not bind to the cannabinoid receptors, but possess various activities. Thus, arachidonoyl serine is a vasodilator and lowers brain damage; arachidonoyl glycine is antinociceptive;
arachidonoyl dopamine affects synaptic transmission in dopaminergic neurons; oleoyl serine is
antiosteoporotic; palmitoyl ethanolamide is anti-inflammatory etc., etc. Numerous papers have
shown that in certain pathological conditions the levels of anandamide and 2-AG are modified
and recently the levels of some of the FAAAs and related compounds of the types just mentioned
have also been shown to change. Can we follow these changes to diagnose early neurological
and other diseases? Does this cluster of compounds affect our physiological and psychological
reactions, our moods, or even contribute to our personality? Linda Parker and I (Mechoulam
and Parker 2013) have previously speculated that “It is tempting to assume that the huge possible variability of the levels and ratios of substances in such a cluster of compounds may allow
an infinite number of individual differences, the raw substance which of course is sculpted by
experience. The known variants of CB1 and FAAH genes may also play a role in these differences.
If this intellectual speculation is shown to have some factual basis, it may lead to major advances
in molecular psychology.”
I assume that the endocannabinoid system still holds quite a few surprises. I believe that we
shall enjoy learning about them soon.
Institute for Drug Research
Hebrew University, Medical Faculty
Jerusalem, Israel

R. Mechoulam

References
Howlett, A.C., Barth, F., and Bonner, T.I., et al. (2002). International Union of Pharmacology. XXVII.
Classification of cannabinoid receptors. Pharmacological Reviews, 54, 161–202.
Mechoulam, R. and Parker, L. (2013). The endocannabinoid system and the brain. Annual Review of
Psychology, 64, 21–47.
Pacher, P. and Mechoulam, R. (2011) Is lipid signaling through cannabinoid 2 receptors part of a protective system? Progress in Lipid Research, 50, 193–211.
Pertwee, R.G., Howlett, A.C., Abood, M.E., et al. (2010). International Union of Basic and Clinical
Pharmacology. LXXIX. Cannabinoid receptors and their ligands: beyond CB1 and CB2. Pharmacological
Reviews, 62, 588–631.

vii

Preface

The pharmacological effects of cannabis have been exploited for over 4800 years for recreational,
medicinal, or religious purposes. However, it is less than 100 years since the chemicals in cannabis
responsible for the production of some of its effects and the pharmacological actions of some of
these chemicals were identified. Particularly noteworthy advances have been the discovery that
cannabis is the source of a family of at least 104 compounds now known as phytocannabinoids,
that one of these compounds is delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), and that this is the main
psychoactive constituent of cannabis. No less important was the elucidation of the chemical
structure of THC, its chemical synthesis, its pharmacological characterization, and the discovery
in the late 1980s that it produces many of its effects by activating a G protein-coupled receptor
now known as the cannabinoid CB1 receptor. Importantly, these major findings were followed by
the discovery in the early 1990s first, that our tissues produce chemicals called endocannabinoids
that activate this receptor, second that another cannabinoid receptor, the CB 2 receptor, is also
activated by both THC and endocannabinoids, and third that this “endocannabinoid system” of
cannabinoid receptors and endogenous agonists modulates the unwanted symptoms or even the
progression of a number of disorders, often in an “autoprotective” manner. It is also noteworthy
that two drugs subsequently found to activate the CB1 receptor were first licensed as medicines
a few years before the discovery of this receptor. These are nabilone (Cesamet ®), a THC-like
synthetic cannabinoid that is not present in cannabis, and synthetic THC, known as dronabinol
(Marinol®). The discovery of the endocannabinoid system reinvigorated the interest of scientists,
clinicians, research funders, and pharmaceutical companies in cannabis and cannabinoids. So too
did a growing number of reports in the 1990s, for example, in the press, of the beneficial effects of
self-medicating with cannabis, particularly for multiple sclerosis (Crowther et al. 2010).
This Handbook of Cannabis is divided into six parts, the first of which begins with a detailed
description of the known chemical structures of many of the constituents of cannabis. Part 1
continues, first with a chapter that includes a historical account of how and why cannabis has
been used over many centuries as a medicine, and then with a chapter that discusses the complex
national and international regulations that confront those who wish to self-administer cannabis
for recreational or medical purposes or to provide either cannabis or individual phytocannabinoids as medicines. This opening section concludes with two chapters about cannabis plants, one
describing the complex morphology, cultivation, harvesting, and processing of these plants, and
the other the extent to which their chemical composition can be manipulated by breeding particular genotypes.
Part 2 presents current knowledge about the main pharmacological actions and effects of cannabis constituents when these are administered acutely or repeatedly. The actions and effects
that are described include the activation or blockade of cannabinoid receptors and/or of other
important pharmacological targets, and the production of significant changes in the functioning of many major physiological systems and processes. This section ends with an account of the
pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and forensic detection of phytocannabinoids.
Part 3 focuses on how cannabis, individual phytocannabinoids, and synthetic cannabinoids
are currently being used to treat certain disorders, either as licensed medicines that in addition

PREFACE

to Cesamet® and Marinol® now include the cannabis-based medicine Sativex®, or through self-­
medication with cannabis that is grown by patients or purchased by them, illegally from drug
dealers or “legally” from “coffee shops” or dispensaries.
Part 4 describes the pharmacological actions and effects that seem to underlie the approved
therapeutic uses of synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists or of plant cannabinoids as licensed
medicines: the amelioration by Cesamet® and Marinol® of nausea and vomiting, by Marinol® of
anorexia and cachexia, and by Sativex® both of cancer pain and of the pain, spasms, and spasticity
of multiple sclerosis.
Part 5 is made up of a group of chapters identifying an ever-growing number of potential, new,
wide-ranging clinical applications for phytocannabinoids that are known to interact with cannabinoid receptors and/or with other pharmacological targets. These potential applications include
the management of schizophrenia, of anxiety, mood and sleep disorders, of neurodegenerative
disorders such as Parkinson’s, Huntington’s, and Alzheimer’s diseases and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, of some kinds of epilepsy, of cardiovascular, metabolic, hepatic, renal, and inflammatory
disorders, of skin disorders such as psoriasis, of glaucoma, age-related macular degeneration, and
uveoretinitis, of bone deficits, and of many kinds of cancer.
The final part, Part 6, turns to the complex issue of “recreational cannabis.” Its first two chapters
identify the sought-after effects of cannabis when it is taken recreationally, and indicate how cannabis can adversely affect mental health and mental performance, particularly in adolescents, for
example, by increasing the risk of developing schizophrenia and by causing dependence/addiction.
Also mentioned is the discovery that impairment of both mental health and mental performance
by cannabis can be lessened by one of its nonpsychoactive phytocannabinoid constituents. The
third chapter in Part 6 moves on to describe the main nonpsychological adverse effects of cannabis,
including undesirable cardiovascular effects, and the risks associated with the smoking of cannabis; this chapter considers too, the extent to which cannabis prohibition is harming not only cannabis users, in particular, but also society in general. The next chapter in this section also describes
the main harms resulting from taking cannabis recreationally, and from current policies directed
at regulating cannabis use. It also considers how these harms might be minimized, and then
goes on to list a set of questions, the answers to which would be expected to facilitate such harm
minimization. The Handbook ends with a chapter about the emergence as recreational drugs of
synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists known as cannabinoid designer drugs, considers whether
any of these drugs are more harmful than cannabis or THC, describes their forensic detection, and
discusses the limitations of their current legal control.
It is clear from the contents of this Handbook that significant progress has already been made in
our understanding both of how cannabis and some of its constituents produce beneficial or harmful effects in the brain or in other organs and tissues, and of how some of the beneficial effects
can be exploited therapeutically with acceptable benefit-to-risk ratios. However, it is also clear
that there are still numerous important needs that have yet to be met, just two of which being the
need to characterize the pharmacology of the many phytocannabinoid and nonphytocannabinoid
constituents of cannabis more completely, and the need to identify and then exploit the best new
therapeutic applications for cannabis-based medicines.
Finally, this book would not be complete without an acknowledgement to the many eminent
scientists, clinicians, and experts on drug regulation who contributed to it in the northern winter, spring, or summer months of 2013. It should also be noted that many cannabinoid scientists
have stood on the shoulders of one particular giant in the field of cannabinoid research: Raphael
Mechoulam, the author of the Foreword to this Handbook. It was he who first elucidated the
structure of THC 50 years ago (Gaoni and Mechoulam 1964), and who, in addition to his many

ix

x

PREFA CE

other achievements since then, led the research that resulted in the discovery of endocannabinoids, initially in the form of anandamide (Devane et al. 1992), and hence in the discovery of the
endocannabinoid system.

References
Crowther, S.M., Reynolds, L.A., and Tansey, E.M. (eds.). (2010). The Medicalization of Cannabis.
Wellcome Witnesses to Twentieth Century Medicine. Vol. 40. London: Wellcome Trust Centre for
the History of Medicine at UCL. Available at: http://www.history.qmul.ac.uk/research/modbiomed/
Publications/wit_vols/44870.pdf.
Devane, W.A., Hanus, L., Breuer, A., et al. (1992). Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds
to the cannabinoid receptor. Science, 258, 1946–1949.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964). Isolation, structure and partial synthesis of an active constituent of
hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86, 1646–1647.

Contents

		Abbreviations xv
		Contributors xxi

Part 1 Constituents, History, International Control, Cultivation,
and Phenotypes of Cannabis
Ethan B. Russo
1 Constituents of Cannabis Sativa 3

Mahmoud ElSohly and Waseem Gul

2 The Pharmacological History of Cannabis 23

Ethan B. Russo

3 International Control of Cannabis 44

Alice P. Mead

4 Cannabis Horticulture 65

David J. Potter

5 The Chemical Phenotypes (Chemotypes) of Cannabis 89

Etienne de Meijer

Part 2 Pharmacology, Pharmacokinetics, Metabolism, and
Forensics
Roger G. Pertwee
6 Known Pharmacological Actions of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol

and of Four Other Chemical Constituents of Cannabis that Activate
Cannabinoid Receptors 115
Roger G. Pertwee and Maria Grazia Cascio

7 Known Pharmacological Actions of Nine Nonpsychotropic

Phytocannabinoids 137

Maria Grazia Cascio and Roger G. Pertwee

8 Effects of Phytocannabinoids on Neurotransmission in the Central

and Peripheral Nervous Systems 157
Bela Szabo

9 Cannabinoids and Addiction 173

Eliot L. Gardner

10 Effects of Phytocannabinoids on Anxiety, Mood, and the Endocrine System 189

Sachin Patel, Matthew N. Hill, and Cecilia J. Hillard

xii

CONTENTS

11 Phytocannabinoids and the Cardiovascular System 208

Saoirse E. O’Sullivan

12 Phytocannabinoids and the Gastrointestinal System 227

Marnie Duncan and Angelo A. Izzo

13 Reproduction and Cannabinoids: Ups and Downs, Ins and Outs 245

Jordyn M. Stuart, Emma Leishman, and Heather B. Bradshaw

14 Phytocannabinoids and the Immune System 261

Guy A. Cabral, Erinn S. Raborn, and Gabriela A. Ferreira

15 Non-Phytocannabinoid Constituents of Cannabis and Herbal Synergy 280

John M. McPartland and Ethan B. Russo

16 Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics and Disposition in Alternative Matrices 296

Marilyn A. Huestis and Michael L. Smith

Part 3 Medicinal Cannabis and Cannabinoids: Clinical Data
Ethan B. Russo
17 Self-Medication with Cannabis 319

Arno Hazekamp and George Pappas

18 Cannabis Distribution: Coffee Shops to Dispensaries 339

Amanda Reiman

19 Development of Cannabis-Based Medicines: Regulatory Hurdles/Routes

in Europe and the United States 356
Alison Thompson and Verity Langfield

20 Licensed Cannabis-Based Medicines: Benefits and Risks 373

Stephen Wright and Geoffrey Guy

21 Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids Licensed as Medicines 393

Mark A. Ware

22 Cannabinoids in Clinical Practice: A UK Perspective 415

William Notcutt and Emily L. Clarke

Part 4 Approved Therapeutic Targets for Phytocannabinoids:
Preclinical Pharmacology
Marnie Duncan
23 Effect of Phytocannabinoids on Nausea and Vomiting 435

Erin M. Rock, Martin A. Sticht, and Linda A. Parker

24 Established and Emerging Concepts of Cannabinoid Action

on Food Intake and their Potential Application to the Treatment
of Anorexia and Cachexia 455
Luigia Cristino and Vincenzo Di Marzo

25 Pain 473

Barbara Costa and Francesca Comelli

CONTENTS﻿

26 Cannabis and Multiple Sclerosis 487

Gareth Pryce and David Baker

Part 5 Some Potential Therapeutic Targets for
Phytocannabinoids
Marnie Duncan
27 Neurodegenerative Disorders Other Than Multiple Sclerosis 505

Javier Fernández-Ruiz, Eva de Lago, María Gómez-Ruiz, Concepción García,
Onintza Sagredo, and Moisés García-Arencibia

28 Cannabidiol/Phytocannabinoids: A New Opportunity for Schizophrenia

Treatment? 526

Daniela Parolaro, Erica Zamberletti, and Tiziana Rubino
29 Phytocannabinoids as Novel Therapeutic Agents for Sleep Disorders 538

Eric Murillo-Rodríguez, Lisa Aguilar-Turton, Stephanie Mijangos-Moreno,
Andrea Sarro-Ramírez, and Óscar Arias-Carrión

30 Cannabis and Epilepsy 547

Claire M. Williams, Nicholas A. Jones, and Benjamin J. Whalley

31 Cardiovascular, Metabolic, Liver, Kidney, and Inflammatory Disorders 564

Pál Pacher and George Kunos

32 Phytocannabinoids and Skin Disorders 582

Sergio Oddi and Mauro Maccarrone

33 Phytocannabinoids in Degenerative and Inflammatory Retinal Diseases:

Glaucoma, Age-Related Macular Degeneration, Diabetic Retinopathy,
and Uveoretinitis 601
Heping Xu and Augusto Azuara-Blanco

34 Bone As a Target for Cannabinoid Therapy 619

Itai Bab

35 Cancer 626

Guillermo Velasco, Cristina Sánchez, and Manuel Guzmán

Part 6 Recreational Cannabis: Sought-After Effects, Adverse
Effects, Designer Drugs, and Harm Minimization
Wayne Hall
36 Desired and Undesired Effects of Cannabis on the Human Mind

and Psychological Well-Being 647

H. Valerie Curran and Celia J.A. Morgan
37 Recreational Cannabis: The Risk of Schizophrenia 661

Paul D. Morrison, Sagnik Bhattacharyya, and Robin M. Murray

38 Nonpsychological Adverse Effects 674

Franjo Grotenhermen

xiii

xiv

CONTENTS

39 Harm Reduction Policies for Cannabis 692

Wayne Hall and Louisa Degenhardt

40 Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics 710

Brian F. Thomas, Jenny L. Wiley, Gerald T. Pollard, and Megan Grabenauer

		Index 731

Abbreviations

ARCI MBG	Addiction Research Center Inventory –
Morphine Benzedrine Scale
ARM
age-related maculopathy
ATF-4
activating transcription factor 4
AUC
area under the curve
b.i.d.
bis in die (twice a day)
BAC
blood alcohol content/concentration
BBB
blood–brain barrier
bce
before common era
BCP
(E)-β-caryophyllene
BDNF
brain-derived neurotrophic factor
BDS
botanical drug substance
BMD
bone mineral density
BOLD
blood oxygen level-dependent
BPRS
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale
BRM
botanical raw material
BSR
brain-stimulation reward
C
Celsius
Ca2+
calcium
[Ca2+]
calcium concentration
2+
[Ca ]i
intracellular calcium concentration
Caco
colorectal carcinoma
CADSS	Clinician Administered Dissociative
States Scale
CAMS
Cannabis in Multiple Sclerosis
CB
cannabinoid
CB1
cannabinoid receptor type 1
CB1R
cannabinoid receptor type 1
CB2
cannabinoid receptor type 2
CB2R
cannabinoid receptor type 2
CBC
cannabichromene
CBCA
cannabichromenic acid
CBCV
cannabichromevarin
CBCVA
cannabichromevarinic acid
CBD
cannabidiol
CBDA
cannabidiolic acid
CBDM
cannabidiol monomethyl ether
CBDV
cannabidivarin
CBDVA
cannabidivarinic acid

▾
Black Triangle medicine
11-OH-THC 11-hydroxy-THC
2-AG
2-arachidonoylglycerol
2D-GCMS	two dimensional gas
chromatography mass
spectrometry
4-AP
4-aminopyridine
5-HT
5-hydroxytryptamine
5-HT
5-hydroxytryptamine
5-HT1A
5-hydroxytryptamine receptor type 1A
5-HT3
5-hydroxytryptamine receptor type 3
8-OH-CBN 8-hydroxycannabinol
8-OH-DPAT	8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino)
tetralin
AANAT
arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase
abn
abnormal
abn-CBD
abnormal cannabidiol
ACEA
arachidonyl-2′-chloroethylamide
ACMD	Advisory Committee on the Misuse
of Drugs
AD
Alzheimer’s disease
ADHD	attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder
ADLs
activities of daily living
AEA
anandamide
AEA	arachidonoylethanolamide
(anandamide)
AED
antiepileptic drug
AEE1
acyl-activating enzyme-1
AHPA	American Herbal Products
Association
AIDS	acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome
ALK
anaplastic lymphoma kinase
ALS
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
AMD
age-related macular degeneration
AMP
adenosine monophosphate
AOM
azoxymethane
AP
area postrema
ARCI	Addiction Research Centre Inventory

xv

xvi

ABBREVIATIONS

CBe	proposed endothelial cannabinoid
receptor
CBEA-C5 A cannabielsoic acid A
CBEA-C5 B cannabielsoic acid B
CBE-C5
cannabielsoin
CBG
cannabigerol
CBGA
cannabigerolic acid
CBGAM	cannabigerolic acid monomethyl
ether
CBG-C5
cannabigerol
CBGM
cannabigerol monomethyl ether
CBGV
cannabigerovarin
CBGVA
cannabigerovarinic acid
CBGVAM	cannabigerovarinic acid
monomethyl-ether
CBL
cannabicyclol
CBL-C3
cannabicyclovarin
CBLA
cannabicyclolic acid
CBM
cannabinoid-based medicine
CBME
cannabis-based medicinal
extract
CBN
cannabinol
CBND-C3
cannabinodivarin
CBND-C5
cannabinodiol
CCL2
chemokine C-C motif ligand 2
CCR2
chemokine C-C motif receptor 2
CDER	Centre of Drug Evaluation and
Research
ce
common era
CFA	Freund’s adjuvant-induced chronic
arthritic pain
CGRP
calcitonin gene-related peptide
CHO
Chinese hamster ovary
CHOP
C/EBP homologous protein
CI
confidence interval
CINV	chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting
CMA
Canadian Medical Association
Cmax
maximum concentration
CME
crude marijuana extract
CNB
carbon nutrient balance
CNS
central nervous system
CoA
coenzyme A
COMT
catechol-O-methyltransferase
ConA
concanavalin A

COPD	chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease
COS-7 cells	African green monkey kidney cells
COX
cyclooxygenase
COX-2
cyclooxygenase 2
CPP
conditioned place preference
CRH
corticotropin-releasing hormone
CRT
choice reaction time
CSA
Controlled Substances Act
CSF
cerebral spinal fluid
CTA
Clinical Trial Application
CTD
Common Technical Document
CTL
cytotoxic T lymphocyte
CYP2C9
cytochrome P450 2C9
D2
dopamine receptor 2
DA	divarinolic acid (Chapter 5) or
divided attention (Chapter 20) or
dopamine
DAGL
diacylglycerol lipase
DAGLα
diacylglycerol lipase alpha
DART
direct analysis in real time
DEA	Drug Enforcement
Administration
Δ8-THC
delta-8-tetrahydrocannabinol
Δ8-THC acid A	delta-8-tetrahydrocannabinolic
acid A
Δ9-THC
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
Δ9-THCA	delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinolic
acid
Δ9-THC acid A	delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
carboxylic acid A
9
Δ -THC acid B	delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
carboxylic acid B
Δ9-THCV
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabivarin
Δ9-THCVA	delta-9-tetrahydrocannabivarinic
acid
DH-CBD	dehydroxyl-cannabidiol (CBD
minus one of its two hydroxyl
groups)
DL VAS	Drug Liking Visual Analogue Scale
DMHP
dimethylheptylpyran
DNBS
dinitrobenzene sulfonic acid
DNFB
2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene
DOX
deoxyxylulose (pathway)
DR
diabetic retinopathy
DRN
dorsal raphe nucleus

ABBREVIATIONS

DRUID	Driving under the Influence of Drugs
Alcohol and Medicines (project)
DSHEA	Dietary Supplement Health and
Education Act
DSM	
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders
DTH
delayed-type hypersensitivity
DUID
driving under the influence of drugs
DVC
dorsal vagal complex
E2
estradiol
EAE	experimental allergic
encephalomyelitis
EAU	experimental autoimmune
uveoretinitis
(E)-BCP
(E)-β-caryophyllene
EBR
author Ethan B. Russo
EC
endocannabinoid
EC50
half-maximal effective concentration
eCB
endocannabinoid
ECDD	WHO Expert Committee on Drug
Dependence
ECoG
electrocorticography
ECS
endocannabinoid system
EDHF	endothelial-derived hyperpolarizing
factor
EDSS
Expanded Disability Status Scale
EDTA
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EEG
electroencephalography
EFS
electrical field stimulation
EGFR
epidermal growth factor receptor
EIU
endotoxin-induced uveitis
ELDD
European Legal Database on Drugs
ELISA
enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay
EMA
European Medicines Agency
EMCDDA European Monitoring Centre for
Drugs and Drug Addiction
EMG
electromyogram/electromyography
EOG
electrooculogram/electrooculography
EQ-5D
EuroQol 5-D
ER
endoplasmic reticulum
Erb
estrogen receptor beta
ERK
extracellular signal-regulated kinase
EU
European Union
FAAH
fatty acid amide hydrolase
FAQs
frequently asked questions
FDA
Food and Drug Administration

FGR
fetal growth restriction
FLV
friend leukemia virus
fMRI	functional magnetic resonance
imaging
FSH
follicle-stimulating hormone
GABA
gamma-aminobutyric acid
GACP	Good Agricultural and Collection
Practice
GAO
Government Accountability Office
GC
gas chromatography
GCDP
Global Commission on Drug Policy
GC-FID	gas chromatography-flame ionization
detector
GCMS	gas chromatography mass
spectrometry
GCMSMS	gas chromatography tandem mass
spectrometry
GERD
gastroesophageal reflux disease
GH
growth hormone
GHB
gamma hydroxybutyric acid
GHRH
growth hormone-releasing hormone
GI
gastrointestinal
GM-CSF	granulocyte macrophage colony
stimulation factor
GnRH
gonadotropin-releasing hormone
GOT	geranylpyrophosphate:olivetolate
transferase
GPP
geranylpyrophosphate
GPR
G protein-coupled receptor
GPR55
G protein-coupled receptor 55
GW
GW Pharmaceuticals plc
ha
hectare
hCB1
human cannabinoid receptor type 1
hCB2
human cannabinoid receptor type 2
HD
Huntington’s disease
HEK
human embryonic kidney
HFD
high-fat diet
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
HL
human promyelocytic leukemia
HLA	human leukocyte antigen
HPA
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal
HPB-ALL	human peripheral blood acute
lymphoid leukemia human
T cell line
HPG
hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal
HPLC	high-performance liquid
chromatography

xvii

xviii

ABBREVIATIONS

HPS
high-pressure sodium
HPT
hypothalamic–pituitary–thyroid
HSV
herpes simplex virus
HU-211
dexanabinol
HUD	Department of Housing and Urban
Development
huPBL-SCID	human peripheral blood
lymphocytes implanted into severe
combined immunodeficient
mouse
i.p.
intraperitoneal
i.v.
intravenous
I/R	ischemia-reperfusion or ischemic
reperfusion
IACM	International Association for
Cannabinoid Medicines
IBD
inflammatory bowel disease
IBS
irritable bowel syndrome
IC
insular cortex
IC50	half-maximal inhibitory
concentration
ICAM-1
intercellular adhesion molecule 1
ICH	International Conference on
Harmonisation of Technical
Requirements for registration of
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
ICNCP	International Code of Nomenclature
for Cultivated Plants
ICOS
inducible T-cell costimulator
ICSD	International Classification of Sleep
Disorders
IFN-γ
interferon-gamma
Ig
immunoglobulin
IHDC
Indian Hemp Drugs Commission
IL
interleukin
IL-2
interleukin 2
IL-2R
interleukin-2 receptor
IL-4
interleukin 4
ILAE	International League Against
Epilepsy
IMP
investigational medicinal product
IMPD	investigational medicinal product
dossier
IMMA
indomethacin morpholinylamide
INCB	International Narcotics Control
Board
IND
investigational new drug
INF
interferon

iNOS
inducible nitric oxide synthase
IOM
Institute of Medicine
IOP
intraocular pressure
IPS
intermittent photic stimulation
JWH-133	3-(1′,1′-dimethylbutyl)-1-deoxydelta-8-tetrahydrocannabinol
JZL184	4-nitrophenyl-4-(dibenzo[d][1,3]
dioxol-5-yl(hydroxy)methyl)
piperidine-1-carboxylate
LC
liquid chromatography
LCMSMS	liquid chromatography tandem mass
spectrometry
L-DOPA
L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine
LES
lower esophageal sphincter
LFP
local field potential
LH
luteinizing hormone
LiCl
lithium chloride
LOB
lying on belly
LOD
limit of detection
LOQ
limit of quantification
LPS
lipopolysaccharide
LSD
lysergic acid diethylamide
MA
Marketing Authorisation
MAA	Marketing Authorisation
Application
MAGL
monoacylglycerol lipase
MALDI-TOF	matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization-time of flight
MAPK
mitogen-activated protein kinase
MCH
melanin-concentrating hormone
MCP-1	monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
MDK
midkine
MEM
mineralized extracellular matrix
MES
maximal electroshock
MFB
medial forebrain bundle
MHC-1
major histocompatibility complex
MHRA	Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency
MIP	macrophage inflammatory protein
MMAR	Health Canada Marihuana Medical
Access Regulations
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
MRM
multiple reaction monitoring
MS	mass spectrometry (Chapter 40) or
multiple sclerosis
MSIS-29
Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale
MTD
maximum tolerated dose

ABBREVIATIONS

mTORC1	mammalian target of rapamycin
complex 1
MVA
mevalonate (pathway)
NAAA	
N-acylethanolamine-hydrolyzing
acid amidase
NAc
nucleus accumbens
NAPE-PLD	
N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine
phospholipase D
NCE
New Chemical Entity
NCI
National Cancer Institute
NDA
new drug application
NE
norepinephrine
NF-κB
nuclear factor kappa B
NFAT
nuclear factor of activated T cell
NIDA	US National Institute on Drug
Abuse
NK
natural killer
NK1
neurokinin 1
NMDA
N-methyl-D-aspartate
NMR
nuclear magnetic resonance
NO
nitric oxide
NOS
nitric oxide synthase
NP
normal phase
NPP
nerylpyrophosphate
NPY
neuropeptide Y
Nrf-2	nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related
factor 2
Nrg1
neuregulin-1
Nrg1 TM HET	transmembrane domain
Neuregulin-1 mutant
NRS
numeric rating scale
NTS
nucleus of the solitary tract
OA
olivetolic acid
OAC
olivetolic acid cyclase
OF
oral fluid
OIG
Office of the Inspector General
OLS
olivetol synthase
OMC
Office of Medicinal Cannabis
ONL
outer nuclear layer
OR
odds ratio
OS
oleoyl serine
OVA
ovalbumin
OVX
ovariectomy
OX1
orexin type 1
p.o.
oral
PANSS	Positive and Negative Syndrome
Scale

PAR	photosynthetically active radiation
(Chapter 4) or Public Assessment
Report (Chapter 19)
PBL
human peripheral blood leukocyte
PBN
parabrachial nucleus
PBQ
phenylbenzoquinone
PCA
principal component analysis
pCB
phytocannabinoid
PCP
phencyclidine
PD
Parkinson’s disease
PDT
photodynamic therapy
PEA
N-palmitoylethanolamine
PET
positron emission tomography
PF
parabolic flight maneuver
PHA
phytohemagglutinin
PII	posterior segment intraocular
inflammation
PJC
prolonged juvenile chemotype
PK
pharmacokinetics
PMA
phorbol myristate acetate
PP
per protocol
PPAR	peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor
PPI
prepulse inhibition
PPMS
primary progressive multiple sclerosis
PPN
pedunculopontine tegmental nuclei
PPR
panretinal photocoagulation
PTSD
posttraumatic stress disorder
PTX
pertussis toxin
PTZ
pentylenetetrazole
PVN
paraventricular nucleus
RANTES	regulated upon activation normal T-cell
expressed and secreted
RBT
random roadside alcohol breath testing
RCT
randomized controlled trial
RDT
roadside drug testing
REM
rapid eye movement sleep
Rf
retention factor
ROS
reactive oxygen species
ROSITA Roadside Testing Assessment
RPE
retinal pigment epithelium
RRMS
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis
RVM
rostral ventromedial medulla
s.c.
subcutaneous
SAMHSA	Substance Abuse Mental Health Services
Administration
SAR
structure–activity relationship

xix

xx

ABBREVIATIONS

SBA
Summary Basis of Approval
SCA
spinocerebellar ataxia
SCE
standardized cannabis extract
SCS
skeletal cannabinoid system
SD
standard deviation
SDV
subjective drug value
SE
standard error
SF CBC
San Francisco Cannabis Buyers Club
SGIC	Subject Global Impression of
Change
SIM
single ion monitoring
SIV
simian immunodeficiency virus
SmPC
Summary of Product Characteristics
SNP
single nucleotide polymorphism
SOD
superoxide dismutase
SOD-1
superoxide dismutase-1
SPARC	San Francisco Patients Resource
Center
SPME
solid phase micro extraction
SPMS	secondary progressive multiple
sclerosis
spp.
species
sRBC
sheep red blood cell
SRM
single reaction monitoring
STM
short-term memory
STZ
streptozotocin
SWS
slow wave sleep
T
testosterone
T3
triiodothyrionine
T4
L-thyroxin
Tat
trans-activating protein
TBI
traumatic brain injury
TCM
traditional Chinese medicine
TDP-43
TAR DNA-binding protein-43
TGF
transforming growth factor
Th
T-helper
Th1
type 1 T-helper cell
Th2
type 2 T-helper cell
THC
tetrahydrocannabinol
THCA
tetrahydrocannabinolic acid
THCCOOH	11-nor-9-carboxytetrahydrocannabinol

THCV
tetrahydrocannabivarin
THCVA
tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid
TKS
tetraketide synthase
TLC
thin layer chromatography
TNBS
trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid
TNF
tumor necrosis factor
TNF-α
tumor necrosis factor alpha
TRH
thyrotropin-releasing hormone
TRIB3
tribbles-homologue 3
TRP
transient receptor potential
TRPC 1
transient receptor potential 1
TRPV	transient receptor potential vanilloid
receptor
TRPV1	transient receptor potential vanilloid
type-1
TRβ1
subtype β1 thyroid hormone
receptor
TSH	thyroid stimulating hormone
(thyrotropin)
UHR
ultra-high risk
UN
United Nations
UNODC	United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime
v/w
volume per weight
VA
visual acuity
VAS
visual analogue scale
VASH
Visual Analogue Scale for
Hunger
Vd
volume of distribution
VEGF
vascular endothelial growth
factor
VIC
visceral insular cortex
VLC
vacuum liquid chromatography
vl-PAG
ventrolateral periaqueductal gray
VP
ventral pallidum
VPpc
parvicellular thalamic nucleus
VTA
ventral tegmental area
W
waking
WAMM	Wo/men’s Alliance for Medical
Marijuana
WHO
World Health Organization
WN
author Willy Notcutt
WT
wild type

Contributors

Lisa Aguilar-Turton
Laboratorio de Neurociencias Moleculares e
Integrativas, Escuela de Medicina, División
Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Anáhuac
Mayab, México

Luigia Cristino
Endocannabinoid Research Group, Institute of
Biomolecular Chemistry, Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, Italy
H. Valerie Curran
Clinical Psychopharmacology Unit, Research
Department of Clinical Psychology, University
College London, UK

Oscar Arias-Carrión
Clinica de Trastornos de Sueño, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, México

Eva de Lago
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, CIBERNED and IRYCIS, Faculty of
Medicine, Complutense University, Spain

Augusto Azuara-Blanco
Centre for Vision and Vascular Science,
Queen’s University Belfast, Institute of Clinical
Science, UK

Etienne de Meijer
GW Pharmaceuticals, UK

Itai Bab
Bone Laboratory, Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel

Louisa Degenhardt
National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre,
University of New South Wales, Australia

David Baker
Neuroinflammation and Trauma Group, UK

Vincenzo Di Marzo
Endocannabinoid Research Group, Institute of
Biomolecular Chemistry, Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, Italy

Sagnik Bhattacharyya
Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College
London, UK
Heather B. Bradshaw
Indiana University, USA

Marnie Duncan
GW Research Ltd, UK

Maria Grazia Cascio
School of Medical Sciences, Institute of
Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, UK

Mahmoud ElSohly
The University of Mississippi, National Center
for Natural Products Research, USA

Guy A. Cabral
Virginia Commonwealth University, School of
Medicine, USA

Javier Fernández-Ruiz
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, CIBERNED and IRYCIS, Faculty of
Medicine, Complutense University, Spain

Emily L. Clarke
Medical School, University of East Anglia, UK

Gabriela A. Ferreira
Virginia Commonwealth University, School of
Medicine, USA

Francesca Comelli
Department of Biotechnology and Bioscience,
University of Milano-Bicocca, Italy

Concepción García
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, CIBERNED and IRYCIS, Faculty of
Medicine, Complutense University, Spain

Barbara Costa
Department of Biotechnology and Bioscience,
University of Milano-Bicocca, Italy
xxi

xxii

CONTRIBUTORS

Moisés García-Arencibia
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, CIBERNED and IRYCIS, Faculty
of Medicine, Complutense University, Spain
Eliot L. Gardner
Neuropsychopharmacology Section,
Intramural Research Program, National
Institute on Drug Abuse, US National
Institutes of Health, USA
María Gómez-Ruiz
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, CIBERNED and IRYCIS,
Faculty of Medicine, Complutense University,
Spain
Megan Grabenauer
RTI International, USA
Franjo Grotenhermen
Nova-Institut, Huerth, Germany
Waseem Gul
ElSohly Laboratories, Inc., USA
Geoffrey Guy
GW Pharmaceuticals, UK
Manuel Guzmán
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology I, Complutense University, Madrid,
Spain
Wayne Hall
UQ Centre for Clinical Research, The
University of Queensland, Australia
Arno Hazekamp
Bedrocan BV, The Netherlands
Matthew N. Hill
University of Calgary, Departments of Cell
Biology and Anatomy & Psychiatry,
The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Canada
Cecilia J. Hillard
Neuroscience Research Center, Medical
College of Wisconsin, USA
Marilyn A. Huestis
Chemistry and Drug Metabolism, IRP
National Institute on Drug Abuse,
National Institutes of Health, USA

Angelo A. Izzo
Department of Pharmacy, University
of Naples Federico II, Italy
Nicholas A. Jones
GW Pharmaceuticals, UK
George Kunos
Laboratory of Physiologic Studies, Section
on Neuroendocrinology, National Institute
on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National
Institutes of Health, USA
Verity Langfield
GW Pharmaceuticals, UK
Emma Leishman
Department of Psychological and Brain
Sciences, Program in Neuroscience, Indiana
University, USA
Mauro Maccarrone
Campus Bio-Medico University of Rome,
Italy and European Center for Brain Research/
Santa Lucia Foundation, Italy
John M. McPartland
College of Medicine, University
of Vermont, USA
Alice P. Mead
GW Pharmaceuticals, USA
Raphael Mechoulam
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Medical
Faculty, Institute for Drug Research,
Israel
Stephanie Mijangos-Moreno
Laboratorio de Neurociencias Moleculares e
Integrativas, Escuela de Medicina, División
Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Anáhuac
Mayab, México
Celia J.A. Morgan
University College London, UK
Paul D. Morrison
Institute of Psychiatry, UK
Eric Murillo-Rodríguez
Laboratorio de Neurociencias Moleculares e
Integrativas, Escuela de Medicina,
División Ciencias de la Salud,
Universidad Anáhuac Mayab, México

CONTRIBUTORS﻿

Robin M. Murray
Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute
of Psychiatry, King’s College, London, UK
William Notcutt
Pain Management, James Paget University
Hospital, Great Yarmouth, UK
Sergio Oddi
University of Teramo, Italy and European
Center for Brain Research/Santa Lucia
Foundation, Italy
Saoirse E. O’Sullivan
School of Medicine, University of Nottingham
Royal Derby Hospital, UK
Pál Pacher
Laboratory of Physiologic Studies, Section on
Oxidative Stress and Tissue Injury, National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism,
National Institutes of Health, USA
George Pappas
Bedrocan BV, The Netherlands
Linda A. Parker
Department of Psychology and Collaborative
Neuroscience Program, University of Guelph,
Canada
Daniela Parolaro
Department of Theoretical and Applied
Sciences, Biomedical Division, and Center
of Neuroscience, University of Insubria, Italy
Sachin Patel
Department of Psychiatry and Molecular
Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, USA
Roger G. Pertwee
School of Medical Sciences, Institute of
Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, UK
Gerald T. Pollard
Howard Associates LLC, USA
David J. Potter
Director of Botanical Research and
Cultivation, GW Pharmaceuticals, UK
Gareth Pryce
Neuroinflammation and Trauma Group, UK

Erinn S. Raborn
Department of Microbiology & Immunology,
Virginia Commonwealth University School of
Medicine, USA
Amanda Reiman
School of Social Welfare, University of
California, Berkeley, USA
Erin M. Rock
Department of Psychology and Collaborative
Neuroscience Program, University of Guelph
Tiziana Rubino
Department of Theoretical
and Applied Sciences, Biomedical Division,
and Center of Neuroscience,
University of Insubria, Italy
Ethan B. Russo
GW Pharmaceuticals, USA
Onintza Sagredo
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, CIBERNED and IRYCIS,
Faculty of Medicine, Complutense University,
Spain
Cristina Sánchez
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology I, Complutense University,
Madrid, Spain
Andrea Sarro-Ramírez
Clinica de Trastornos de Sueño, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, México
Michael L. Smith
US Army Forensic Toxicology Drug Testing
Laboratory Fort Meade, USA
Martin A. Sticht
Department of Psychology and Collaborative
Neuroscience Program, University of Guelph,
Canada
Jordyn M. Stuart
Indiana University, USA
Bela Szabo
Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische
Pharmakologie und Toxikologie AlbertLudwigs-Universität, Germany

xxiii

xxiv

CONTRIBUTORS

Alison Thompson
GW Pharmaceuticals, UK
Brian F. Thomas
RTI International, USA
Guillermo Velasco
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology I, Complutense University, Spain
Mark A. Ware
Departments of Anesthesia and Family
Medicine, McGill University, Canada
Benjamin J. Whalley
University of Reading, UK
Jenny L. Wiley
RTI International, USA

Claire M. Williams
School of Psychology & Clinical
Language Sciences,
University of Reading, UK
Stephen Wright
GW Pharmaceuticals, UK
Heping Xu
Centre for Vision and Vascular Science,
Queen’s University Belfast, UK
Erica Zamberletti
Department of Theoretical and Applied
Sciences, Biomedical Division, and
Center of Neuroscience,
University of Insubria, Italy

Fig. 4.1 A capitate sessile trichome observed on the edge of one of the first pair of true leaves of a
cannabis seedling. (Scale bar = 25µm.)

B

C

Fig. 4.2 (B) A capitate stalked trichome, temporarily mounted in glycerol and viewed in transmitted
light. (C) A glandular trichome with partly abscised resin head.
Reproduced from Potter, D. J. “The propagation, characterisation and optimisation of cannabis as a phytopharmaceutical” © 2009, The Author.

A

B

Fig. 4.3 (A) A dense pubescence of glandular stalked trichomes on a bract within a cannabis female
inflorescence. The orange/brown structures are senesced stigmas. (B) Two young cotton-­melon aphids
(Aphis gossypii) irreversibly adhered to the resin heads of capitate stalked trichomes.

A

B

C

Fig. 4.4 (A) A small bulbous trichome alongside a fully developed glandular stalked trichome.
The contrast in resin head diameter (10 µm vs. 100 µm) is clear. (B) A simple bulbous trichome and
(C) a complex bulbous trichome. These are 10–15 µm in diameter.

A

B

C

D

E

Fig. 5.3 Glandular trichomes associated to different chemotypes. (A) CBDA- and/or THCApredominant plants carry stalked trichomes with large transparent heads. CBGA-predominant
clones with underlying BD02/BD02 (B) and BT0/BT0 (C) genotype both show white opaque trichome
heads. (D) Cannabinoid-free chemotypes carry trichomes with shriveled heads. (E) Optimized CBCA
predominant clones lack stalked trichomes and show a high density of sessile trichomes.
© T.J. Wilkinson.

A

M16
B

C

M319

M3
D

M299

Fig. 5.5 Macro- and microscopic photos of clones used for Sativex® raw material production,
M16 (CBD) and M3 (THC), and their respective cannabinoid-free homologues M319 and M299.
The homologues were selected from backcross progenies (e.g., M299 = M3 × (M3 × (M3 ×
knockout progenitor))) and share 87.5% genetic identity with the corresponding “original.”
© T.J. Wilkinson.

Fig. 32.1 Schematic representation of the skin. See text for details.

Fig. 33.1 CB1 receptor expression in mouse eye. Eye sections from a 3-month-old mouse were
stained for CB1 receptor (green) and propidium iodide (red), and observed by confocal microscopy.
(A) cornea, (B) ciliary body, (C) inner retina, (D) outer retina; (E) optic nerve. CB, ciliary body;
Ch, choroid; En, endothelia; Ep, epithelia; GL, ganglion layer; INL, inner nuclear layer; ONL, outer
nuclear layer; RPE, retinal pigment epithelia; Str, stroma.

Fig. 33.2 CB2 receptor expression in mouse cornea and ciliary body. Eye sections from a 3-monthold mouse were stained for CB2 receptor (green) and propidium iodide (red), and observed by
confocal microscopy. (A) cornea, (B) ciliary body. CB, ciliary body; En, endothelia; Ep, epithelia;
Sc, sclera; Str, stroma.

CMP

C

25

Infiltration
Structural

20
15
10
5
0

Control

THC

D 80

30000
25000
20000
15000
1200
800

**

Control
THC

**

400
0

B

THC

Mean Disease Score

Control

None

Con A
Treatment

IRBP

Cytokine (pg/ml)

A

Control
THC

60
40
20
0

**

**

*

*

*

IFNγ IL-2 IL-4 IL-6 IL-10 IL-17 IL-12 IL21 TNFα

Fig. 33.4 The effect of THC on EAU. EAU was induced in C57BL/6 mice using interphotoreceptor
retinoid binding protein (IRBP) peptide 1–20 immunization. Mice were treated with THC (i.p., daily
5 mg/kg) from day 1–20 post-immunization. Control mice were treated with the vehicle (Tween-20).
(A) Fundus images from control and THC-treated EAU mice. (B) Histological investigation showing
the retinal structural score and infiltration score. (C) T-lymphocyte proliferation in response to concanavalin A (Con A) or IRBP1-20 peptide stimulation. (D) Cytokine production by splenocytes from
control and THC treated EAU mice. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01 compared to control group (n ≥ 5).

+ Anti-GF Abs
(Anti-MDK)
(Anti-VEGF?)
Cannabinoids

+ RTK inhibitors
(ALK inhibitors)
(EGFR inhibitors?)
MDK

+ Selective silencing of
resistance factors

EGFR

ALK

CB1, CB 2

+ Classical
chemotherapeutic
drugs (TMZ)

AREG

Ceramide

ER stress

ERK
p8
TRIB3

+ ER stress/autophagy
inducers

AKT

+ Inhibitors of the
AKT/mTORC1 axis
mTORC1

Autophagy

Apoptosis

Fig. 35.2 Possible strategies aimed at optimizing cannabinoid-based therapies against gliomas.
Glioblastoma is highly resistant to current anticancer therapies (Lonardi et al. 2005; Nieder et al.
2006; Purow et al. 2009). Specifically, resistance of glioma cells to cannabinoid-induced cell death
relies, at least in part, on the enhanced expression of the growth factor midkine (MDK) and the subsequent activation of the anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase (ALK) (Lorente et al. 2011).
Likewise, enhanced expression of the heparin-bound EGFR-ligand amphiregulin (AREG) can promote
resistance to THC antitumor action via ERK stimulation (Lorente et al. 2009). Combination of THC
with pharmacological inhibitors of ALK (or genetic inhibition of MDK) enhances cannabinoid action
in resistant tumors, which provides the rationale for the design of targeted therapies capable of
increasing cannabinoid antineoplastic activity (Lorente et al. 2011). Combinations of cannabinoids
with classical chemotherapeutic drugs such as the alkylating agent temozolomide (TMZ; the benchmark agent for the management of glioblastoma (Lonardi et al. 2005; Stupp et al. 2005)) have been
shown to produce a strong anticancer action in animal models (Torres et al. 2011). Combining cannabinoids and TMZ is thus a very attractive possibility for clinical studies aimed at investigating cannabinoids antitumor effects in glioblastoma. Other potentially interesting strategies to enhance cannabinoid anticancer action (still requiring additional experimental support from data obtained using
preclinical models) could be combining cannabinoids with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and/
or autophagy inducers or with inhibitors of the AKT–mechanistic target of rapamycin C1 (mTORC1)
axis. Abs: antibodies; EGFR: epidermal growth factor receptor; ERK: extracellular signal-regulated
kinase; GF: growth factors; RTK: receptor tyrosine kinase; TRIB3: tribbles 3; VEGF: vascular endothelial growth factor.
Reproduced from Nature Reviews Cancer, 12(6) Velasco G., Sánchez C. and Guzmán M., Towards the use of cannabinoids as antitumour agents, pp. 436–44, © 2012, Nature Publishing Group.

Part 1

Constituents, History,
International Control,
Cultivation, and Phenotypes
of Cannabis
Ethan B. Russo

Part 1 Overview
This volume commences with an examination of cannabis constituents by
ElSohly and Gull, presenting structures for the now over 100 agents that
have come to be known as phytocannabinoids. Some of these may be
artifacts of laboratory analysis, and perhaps only 12 have been investigated
pharmacologically in any detail (Russo 2011).
Chapter 2 by Russo presents a pharmacological history of cannabis via a
detailed chronology, followed by a discussion of four lesser-known indications
for cannabis medicine: tinnitus, tetanus, burns, and its use in pediatrics
through the ages, along with modern rationales for such usage.
In Chapter 3, Mead offers a clear and up-to-date dissection of current
international law on medicinal cannabis usage that will be of great utility to
anyone attempting to understand this difficult and changing topic.
Potter brings light in Chapter 4 to the heretofore clandestine topic of
cannabis cultivation, explaining the process in great detail from vegetative
propagation to subsequent harvest and processing for medical extraction.
Chapter 5 by de Meijer explains the fascinating topic of the process by
which, through Mendelian genetics, it has been possible to selectively breed
cannabis cultivars expressing high titers of specific phytocannabinoids for their
formulation into new medicines.

2

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Reference
Russo, E.B. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-­
terpenoid entourage effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1344–1364.

Chapter 1

Constituents of Cannabis Sativa
Mahmoud ElSohly and Waseem Gul

1.1 Introduction
Cannabis is a widely distributed plant, found in a variety of habitats and altitudes (Merlin 2003).
Its use by humans goes back for over 5000 years (Farnsworth 1969) and it is one of the oldest plant
sources of food and textile fiber (Kriese 2004). The cultivation of Cannabis sativa (C. sativa L.)
for textile fiber originated in Western Asia and Egypt, subsequently extended to Europe, and in
1606 hemp cultivation was introduced to North America (Port Royal, Canada) (Small and Marcus
2002). Under current federal laws, it is prohibited to cultivate cannabis in the United States.
Cannabis has been indicated for the treatment of pain, glaucoma, nausea, depression, and neuralgia (Guindon and Hohmann 2009; Jarvinen et al. 2002; Liang et al. 2004; Slatkin 2007; Viveros
and Marco 2007). The therapeutic value of the phytocannabinoids has also been reported for
HIV/AIDS symptom management and multiple sclerosis treatment (Abrams et al. 2007; Pryce
and Baker 2005).

1.2 Constituents of Cannabis sativa L.
The total number of natural compounds identified or isolated from C. sativa L. has continued to
increase over the last few decades. In 1980, 423 compounds were reported in cannabis (Turner
et al. 1980). This number increased in 1995 to 483 (Ross and ElSohly 1995). Between 1995 and
2005 eight compounds were added (ElSohly and Slade 2005). The main focus of this chapter is to
provide a chemical account of a total of 104 cannabinoids (isolated or reported to date) as well as
of the 22 noncannabinoid constituents (isolated between 2005 and 2012) (Table 1.1). This brings
the total number of constituents identified in cannabis to 545 compounds.
1.2.1 Cannabinoids (104)

Today, the term “cannabinoids” refers to not only the chemical substances isolated from
C. sativa L. exhibiting the typical C21 terpenophenolic skeleton, but also to their derivatives and
transformation products, with the term “phytocannabinoids” coined for those originating from
the plant. A total of 104 phytocannabinoids have been isolated to date (Table 1.1), classified
into 11 types, namely: (–)-delta-9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC), (–)-delta-8-trans-­
tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ8-THC), cannabigerol (CBG), cannabichromene (CBC), cannabidiol
(CBD), cannabinodiol (CBND), cannabielsoin (CBE), cannabicyclol (CBL), cannabinol (CBN),
cannabitriol (CBT), and miscellaneous-type cannabinoids.

4

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Table 1.1 Constituents of C. sativa L. by chemical class as of the end of 2012
Chemical class

Number of compounds

Δ9-THC type

18

Δ8-THC type

2

CBG type

17

CBC type

8

CBD type

8

CBND type

2

CBE type

5

CBL type

3

CBN type

10

CBT type

9

Misc type

22

Total cannabinoids

104

Total noncannabinoids

441

Total

545

1.2.1.1 (−)-Delta-9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) type

The structure of Δ9-THC (1) was first reported by Gaoni and Mechoulam (1964a) who not
only determined its absolute configuration as trans-(6aR,10aR), but also discussed psychotropic properties of Δ9-THC (Δ1-THC according to the terpenoid numbering system). A hexane extract of hashish was chromatographed on florisil to yield an active fraction which was
re-chromatographed on alumina to produce Δ9-THC. Crystalline 3,5-dinitrophenyl urethane
of Δ9-THC was prepared and mild basic hydrolysis yielded pure Δ 9-THC. Archer et al. (1970)
reported the detailed conformation of Δ9-THC using X-ray and proton magnetic resonance analysis. ­Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol carboxylic acid A (Δ9-THC acid A, 2) was first isolated by Korte
et al. (1965a) from a hashish extract. Pure Δ9-THC-acid A is sensitive to light and was not capable of crystallization. Mechoulam et al. (1969) isolated a second Δ9-THC acid present in hashish
(Δ9-THC-acid B, 3). Hashish sole (a flat form of illicit hashish that might be rectangular- or ovalshaped) was chromatographed on silicic acid by eluting with a 1:1 ether/petroleum ether solution.
Δ9-THC-acid B was shown to be more polar than Δ9-THC-acid A on thin layer chromatography
(TLC). Hashish soles that contained Δ9-THC-acid B had little or no Δ9-THC-acid A which could
be caused by biochemical variation. The crystal structure of Δ9-THC-acid B was determined by
Rosenqvist and Ottersen (1975). Gill (1971) isolated Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin (Δ9-THCV, 4)
from hashish by eluting with 4:1 light petroleum/ether on a column containing deactivated alumina. Countercurrent distribution was used to separate the material after obtaining an orange oil
from concentrating the column fractions. The distribution resulted in three fractions in which the
second fraction went through another cycle to purify Δ9-THCV. Fetterman and Turner (1972)
reported spectral evidence for Δ9-trans-tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid (Δ9-THCVA, 5) followed by
mass spectral data (Turner et al. 1973). This report on C3 homologs of cannabinoids was based on
the evaluation of 51 samples from different geographical locations. Vree et al. (1972a) identified

CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS SATIVA

Δ9-tetrahydrocannabiorcol (6) from an extract of Brazilian cannabis as a homologue of Δ9-THC
that contained a methyl side chain. Electron voltage-mass fragment intensity graphs from gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GCMS) provided a mass of 258 which was the only possible isomer of Δ9-THC that contained 56 less mass units. The Δ9-tetrahydrocannabiorcol concentration in hashish samples was very low and, therefore, was not expected to contribute much
to the biological activity of the drug. Harvey (1976) discovered Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol-C4
(7) and detected delta-9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid-C4 (Δ 9-trans-THCA-C4, 8) by
GCMS in samples of cannabis. He also detected Δ 9-trans-tetrahydrocannabiorcolic acid (9).
Eight new tetrahydrocannabinol type compounds namely β-fenchyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate
(10), α-fenchyl-Δ 9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (11), epi-bornyl-Δ 9-tetrahydrocannabinolate
(12), bornyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (13), α-terpenyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (14),
4-terpenyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (15), α-cadinyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (16), and
γ-eudesmyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (17) were isolated by Ahmed et al. (2008a). Their structures (Fig. 1.1) were established on the basis of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopic analysis and GCMS as mono- or sesquiterpenoid esters of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic
acid A, the precursor of Δ9-THC. Under the high temperature conditions of the GCMS analysis,
these compounds fragment into their two components to yield Δ9-THC and the mono- or sesquiterpene. These cannabinoid esters were isolated from a high-potency C. sativa variety using
multiple ­chromatographic techniques, including vacuum liquid chromatography (VLC), C18
semipreparative high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and semipreparative chiral HPLC (Ahmed et al. 2008a). Cannabisol (18, Fig. 1.1), a dimeric cannabinoid, was isolated
employing flash silica gel column chromatography from a group of illicit cannabis samples with
high CBG content (Zulfiqar et al. 2012).
1.2.1.2 (−)-Delta-8-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ8-THC) type

There are only two Δ8-THC–type cannabinoids in cannabis, namely delta-8-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ8-THC, 19) and delta-8-trans-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid A (Δ8-THC acid, 20,
Fig. 1.2) (Hanuŝ and Krejčí 1975; Hively et al. 1966).
Hively et al. (1966) isolated Δ8-THC (Δ6-THC following the terpenoid numbering system)
from a petroleum ether extract of the leaves and flowering tops of marijuana grown in Maryland.
In 1970, Archer et al. (1970) published detailed NMR and X-ray data on Δ8-THC.
Δ 8-THC acid was isolated from Cannabis sativa of Czechoslovakian origin (Hanuŝ and
Krejčí 1975).
1.2.1.3 Cannabigerol (CBG) type

The first compound isolated from cannabis resin in a pure form was cannabigerol (CBG-C5,
21) (Fig. 1.3). Gaoni and Mechoulam (1964b) were the first to isolate CBG, and reported that it
is produced by the condensation of geranyl pyrophosphate with olivetol. They also found cannabigerolic acid (CBGA, 22), identified as its methyl ester from the acidic fraction of a hashish
sole extract, being the most polar acid compound (Mechoulam and Gaoni 1965). Yamauchi et al.
(1968) isolated cannabigerol monomethyl ether (CBGM, 23) by heating the acid fraction of the
benzene percolate of the leaves of Minamioshihara No. 1 variety (M-1) for 7 h to obtain a phenolic mixture. Using benzene to elute the compound by column chromatography, a pale yellow
substance was obtained and purified by TLC. Mass spectra confirmed that this fraction was CBG
monomethyl ether with a molecular weight of 330. Shoyama et al. (1970) isolated cannabigerolic
acid monomethyl ether (CBGAM, 24) by passing M-1 percolate (free of chlorophyll) through a
silica gel column with 5:1 hexane/ethyl acetate. CBGAM eluted along with Δ9-THC-acid. This

5

6

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

OR1

OH

O

R3

O
R2

Δ9-THC (1)

R4

(2) R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = C5H11, R4 = COOH
(3) R1 = H, R2 = COOH, R3 = C5H11, R4 = H

Δ9-THC acid A
Δ9-THC acid B

(4) R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = C3H7, R4 = H
(5) R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = C3H7, R4 = COOH
(6) R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = CH3, R4 = H
(7) R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = C4H9, R4 = H

Δ9-THCV
Δ9-THCVA
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabiorcol
Δ9-tetrahydrocannbinol-C4
Δ9-trans-THCA-C4

(8) R1 = H, R2 = COOH or H, R3 = C4H9, R4 = COOH or H
(9) R1 = H, R2 = COOH or H, R3 = CH3, R4 = COOH or H

Δ9-tetrahydrocannabiorcolic acid
9
10a
H

6a

10 OH O
H
2

OR

O

R=

β-fenchyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (10)

α-terpenyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (14)

α-fenchyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (11)

4-terpenyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (15)
H

H
epi-bornyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (12)

α-cadinyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (16)

bornyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (13)

γ-eudesmyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate (17)

H
H

OH

OH
H

O

O

H

cannabisol (18)

Fig. 1.1 (−)-Δ9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) type cannabinoids.

CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS SATIVA

8

H

OH
R

H
O

Δ8-THC
(19) R = H
Δ8-THC acid (20) R = COOH

Fig. 1.2 (−)-Δ8-transtetrahydrocannabinol (Δ8-THC)
type cannabinoids.

mixture was purified on a second column filled with silver nitrate-silica gel which resulted in pure
CBGAM. Cannabigerovarin (CBGV, 25) was also isolated by Shoyama et al. (1975) by heating the
benzene extract of cannabis at 160°C for 20 min to achieve decarboxylation. Neutral cannabinoid
fractions were then eluted with benzene and a mixture of (20:10:1) benzene/hexane/diethyl amine
from a silica gel column. CBGV was identified by comparison with synthetic CBGV prepared by
Mechoulam and Yagen (1969). Cannabigerovarinic acid (CBGVA, 26) was isolated by Shoyama
et al. as a minor component of an extract of dried leaves of Thai Cannabis (Shoyama et al. 1977).
The acid fraction from the dried leaves was purified by column chromatography on silica gel
and eluted with a hexane/ethyl acetate mixture along with a 5:1 benzene-acetone mixture. The
product appeared as clear needles after recrystallization from a hexane/chloroform solution. The
spectral data showed that CBGVA is the major acid of CBGV and its structure was confirmed by
comparison with synthetic CBGVA. Taura et al. (1995) isolated cannabinerolic acid (27) from a
Mexican strain of C. sativa by extracting the air-dried leaves with benzene and evaporating to dryness. After dissolving the residue in Me2CO and ridding of insoluble particles, the solution was
dried and loaded on a silica gel column which was eluted with a 9:1 benzene/Me2CO mixture. The
fraction containing cannabigerolic acid was chromatographed again and eluted with 3:1 hexane/
ethyl acetate to give pure cannabigerolic acid.
Ahmed et al. (2008a) isolated two cannabigerolic acid esters, γ-eudesmyl cannabigerolate (28)
and α-cadinyl cannabigerolate (29), from C. sativa of high potency. The hexane extract of cannabis was purified on flash silica gel using VLC. Fractions that were shown to have compounds with
higher retention factor (Rf ) than that of Δ9-THC were mixed together and chromatographed on
Sephadex® LH-20 and flash silica gel. Semipreparative reversed-phase (RP) and chiral HPLC were
both used for further purification from which the two esters were isolated. The spectroscopic data
of γ-eudesmyl cannabigerolate and α-cadinyl cannabigerolate proved that both compounds were
esters of CBGA (Radwan et al. 2008a).
Radwan et al. (2008a, 2009) isolated six compounds (30–35), 5-acetyl-4-hydroxycannabigerol
(30), 4-acetoxy-2-geranyl-5-hydroxy-3-n-pentylphenol (31) (±)-6,7-trans-epoxycannabigerolic
acid (32), (±)-6,7-cis-epoxycannabigerolic acid (33), (±)-6,7-cis-epoxycannabigerol (34) and
(±)-6,7-trans-epxoycannabigerol (35), from high-potency C. sativa (Fig. 1.3). Hexane extract
was chromatographed on flash silica gel. Fractions close to the Rf of Δ9-THC were combined
and purified by flash silica chromatography and Sephadex® LH-20, followed by preparative C18
HPLC (Radwan et al. 2009). In their procedures, Appendino et al. (2008) fractionated cannabis
extract on a RP C18 silica gel column which was followed by silica gel column chromatography
and subsequent use of normal phase (NP) HPLC to isolate a novel, polar dihydroxy cannabigerol
derivative (carmagerol, 36). Pollastro et al. (2011) isolated a lipophilic analogue of cannabigerol,
sesquicannabigerol (37), from the waxy fraction of the variety Carma of fiber hemp. Methanolic
KOH was used for the hydrolysis of the wax and purification was performed by gravity silica gel
column chromatography which was followed by flash chromatography over neutral alumina.

7

8

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

OH
CBG-C5(21)

OR1

HO

OH

(22) R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = COOH, R4 = C5H11
(23) R1 = CH3, R2 = H, R3 = H, R4 = C5H11
(24) R1 = H , R2 = CH3, R3 = COOH, R4 = C5H11
(25) R1 = H , R2 = H, R3 = H, R4 = C3H7
(26) R1 = H , R2 = H, R3 = COOH, R4 = C3H7
(27) R1 = H , R2 = H, R3 = COOH, R4 = C5H11

O
OR2

6

HO

H

R2 =

1’’’

H

γ-eudesmyl cannabigerolate (28) α-cadinyl cannabigerolate (29)

4 OH
OAc

O

H
(32a)

H
(32b)

O

O

O

H
(34a)

(34b)

O

R = COOH

H

O

H
H
(35a)
(35b)
(±)-6,7-trans-epoxycannabigerol

OH
OH

O

(±)-6,7-cis-epoxycannabigerol

4-acetoxy-2-geranyl-5-hydroxy-3-n-pentylphenol (31)R=
OH

R

H
H
(33a)
(33b)
(±)-6,7-cis-epoxycannabigerolic acid

4
OH

OH

R

OH

7
H
HO

O

5-acetyl-4-hydroxycannabigerol (30)

3

O

(±)-6,7-trans-epoxycannabigerolic acid

OH
5

R4

R2O

CBGA
CBGM
CBGAM
CBGV
CBGVA
cannabinerolic acid

AcO

R3

HO
carmagerol (36)

OH

HO

sesquicannabigerol (37)

Fig. 1.3 Cannabigerol (CBG) type cannabinoids.

R= H

CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS SATIVA

1.2.1.4 Cannabichromene (CBC) type

The research groups of Claussen et al. (1966) and Gaoni and Mechoulam (1966) independently
disclosed cannabichromene (CBC-C5, 38). Gaoni and Mechoulam (1966) performed isolation
from a hexane extract on Florisil that yielded 1.5% of CBC-C5. Shoyama et al. (1968) isolated cannabichromenic acid (CBCA, 39) from the benzene percolate of hemp via a procedure described
by Shultz et al. (1960). A solvent system of 1:1 hexane/ethyl acetate yielded CBCA which was
confirmed by NMR spectroscopy. The infrared (IR) spectra of CBCA displayed intermolecular
hydrogen bonding between the carboxyl and hydroxyl groups and the structure showed similarities to that of THCA according to the location of the carboxyl group. Cannabichromevarin
(CBCV, 40) was isolated by Shoyama et al. (1975) as a brownish red cannabinoid by repeatedly passing the neutral cannabinoids from the benzene percolate of the leaves of Thai Cannabis
through a silica gel column and eluting with benzene and 20:10:1 benzene-hexane-diethyl.
Shoyama et al. (1977) also isolated cannabichromevarinic acid (CBCVA, 41) as a minor fraction
from young cannabis. The structure of natural CBCVA was confirmed by synthesis. A CBC-C3
type compound with a 4-methyl-2-pentenyl side chain at C2 (42) was separated and identified by
Morita and Ando (1984).
Radwan et al. (2009) reported the isolation of three new cannabichromene type cannabinoids,
namely (±)-4-acetoxycannabichromene (43), (±)-3″-hydroxy-Δ4″-cannabichromene (44), and
(−)-7-hydroxycannabichromane (45) from high-potency C. sativa by applying silica gel VLC, Si
HPLC and C18 HPLC (Fig. 1.4).

OH

OH
R2

O

R3

CBC-C5 (38)

6''
2''

4''
5''

3''

9 7
1''

8

8a

6 O 4a

OH
1
4
OAc

O

R1

CBCA (39) R1 = C5H11, R2 = COOH, R3 = (CH2)2CH = C(CH3)2
CBCV (40) R1 = C3H7, R2 = H, R3 = (CH2)2CH = C(CH3)2
CBCVA (41) R1 = C3H7, R2 = COOH, R3 = (CH2)2CH = C(CH3)2
CBC-C3 (42) R1 = C3H7, R2 = H, R3 = CH2CH = CHCH(CH3)2
OH
2
3

O
OH
(±)-3''-hydroxy-Δ4''-cannabichromene (44)

(±)- 4-acetoxycannabichromene (43)
OH
HO 7
O

(–)-7-hydroxycannabichromane (45)

Fig. 1.4 Cannabichromene (CBC) type cannabinoids.

9

10

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

1.2.1.5 Cannabidiol (CBD) type

Cannabidiol (CBD, 46) and cannabidiolic acid (CBDA, 47) are the major metabolites of the
nonpsychotropic (fiber-type) varieties of C. sativa (Fig. 1.5). Adams et al. (1940a) isolated cannabidiol (CBD) and after allowing the oily CBD to stand for several weeks CBD was crystallized,
while, Petrzilka et al. (1969) reported its synthesis and absolute configuration as (−)-trans-(1R,6R).
Krejčí and Šantavý (1955) isolated CBDA. Vollner et al. (1969) isolated cannabidivarin (CBDV, 48)
when ligroin extract of hashish was chromatographed on silica gel. Shoyama et al. (1972a) isolated
cannabidiol monomethyl ether (CBDM, 49) by obtaining neutral cannabinoids from the ethanol
extract of the leaves from Minamioshihara No. 1 variety (M-1). The cannabinoids were then chromatographed on Florisil and eluted with benzene. The eluted fraction was rechromatographed
on silica gel and eluted with 3:1 hexane/benzene to obtain CBDM. Cannabidiorcol (CBD-C1, 50)
was detected by Vree et al. (1972a) in an n-hexane extract of Lebanese hashish. In a similar
extract of Brazilian marijuana, no cannabidiorcol was found. Harvey reported cannabidiolC4 (CBD-C4, 51) in 1976. Crushed cannabis resin and leaves were percolated with ethyl acetate
which upon filtration and concentration gave a residue. This residue was derivatized and analyzed
on GCMS. Cannabidiol-C4 was identified by its mass and methylene unit. From a benzene extract
of Thailand cannabis, cannabidivarinic acid (CBDVA, 52) was isolated by Shoyama et al. (1977).
Taglialatela-Scafati et al. (2010) recently isolated cannabimovone (53) as a polar cannabinoid
from an acetone extract of Cannabis sativa L. that is nonpsychotropic.
1.2.1.6 Cannabinodiol (CBND) type

CBND-type cannabinoids are the aromatized derivatives of CBD. Cannabinodiol (CBND-C 5,
54) and cannabinodivarin (CBND-C 3, 55) (Fig. 1.6) are the only two compounds from this
subclass that have been characterized from C. sativa (ElSohly and Slade 2005; Turner et al.
1980). Cannabinodiol was isolated from a hexane-ether extract of Lebanese hashish by Lousberg
et al. (1977). The propyl homolog of cannabinodiol, cannabinodivarin, was detected by GCMS
(Turner et al. 1980).

OH

OH

R
HO
CBD (46) R = H
CBDA (47) R = COOH

HO

O

CBDVA (52) R = COOH
CBDV (48) R = H

CBDM (49)

O

OH

HO
CBD-C1 (50)

OH

R

OH

HO
CBD-C4 (51)

Fig. 1.5 Cannabidiol (CBD) type cannabinoids.

OH
OH

HO
cannabimovone (53)

CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS SATIVA

OH

OH

HO
CBND-C5 (54)

HO
CBND-C3 (55)

Fig. 1.6 Cannabinodiol (CBND)
type cannabinoids.

1.2.1.7 Cannabielsoin (CBE) type

Five cannabielsoin-type cannabinoids named as cannabielsoin (CBE-C5, 56), cannabielsoic acid
A (CBEA-C5 A, 57), cannabielsoic acid B (CBEA-C5 B, 58), cannabielsoin-C3 (CBE-C3, 59), and
cannabielsoic-C3 acid B (CBEA-C3 B, 60) make up the cannabielsoin-type cannabinoids found in
cannabis (Fig. 1.7). These cannabielsoin-type cannabinoids can be produced by photo-oxidation
from naturally occurring CBD and CBD acids (Shani and Mechoulam 1974). Cannabielsion (CBE)
was detected by Bercht et al. (1973) from an ethanolic extract of Lebanese hashish. This ethanolic
extract was subjected to a 130-step counter current distribution. Uliss et al. (1974) established
its structure by synthesis starting from cannabidiol diacetate. CBEA-C5 A and CBEA-C5 B were
isolated from a benzene extract of Lebanese hashish (Shani and Mechoulam 1974). Furthermore,
CBE-C5 was also identified as a mammalian metabolite of CBD (Yamamoto et al. 1991).
1.2.1.8 Cannabicyclol (CBL) type

Cannabicyclol (CBL), cannabicyclolic acid (CBLA), and cannabicyclovarin (CBL-C3) (Fig. 1.8)
are the only compounds isolated from this subclass (Claussen et al., 1968; Korte and Sieper 1964;
Mechoulam and Gaoni 1967; Shoyama et al. 1972b, 1981).

HO

HO

H

H

O
R

H

HO

O

H

HO

H

HO

CBE-C5
(56) R = H
CBEA-C5 A (57) R = COOH

HO

COOH

H

OH
R

H
O

CBL (61) R = H
CBLA (62) R = COOH

Fig. 1.8 Cannabicyclol (CBL) type cannabinoids.

R

CBE-C3
(59) R = H
CBEA-C3 B (60) R = COOH

CBEA-C5 B (58)

Fig. 1.7 Cannabielsoin (CBE) type cannabinoids.

H

H

O

H

H

OH

H
O
CBL-C3 (63)

11

12

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

CBL (61) was first detected by Korte and Sieper in 1964. Korte et al. (1965b) isolated CBL by
TLC of various hashish and cannabis samples.
Cannabicyclolic acid (CBLA, 62) was isolated from benzene extract of dried leaves of cannabis
on a polyamide column (Shoyama et al. (1972b). Cannabicyclovarin (CBL-C3, 63) was identified
in an ether extract of Congo marihuana by comparison of the electron voltage versus mass fragment graph for cannabicyclol and cannabicyclol-C3 (Korte et al. 1965b).
1.2.1.9 Cannabinol (CBN) type

Cannabinol (CBN, 64), was first named by Wood et al. in 1896. CBN was prepared as oil from
exuded resin of Indian hemp. Later, Wood et al. (1899) acetylated this oil and obtained pure CBN
as its acetate. Adams et al. (1940b) determined the correct structure of CBN. Cannabinolic acid
A (CBNA, 65) was isolated from a crude acidic fraction of hashish, which was esterified with dioazomethane and purified as its methyl ester on an acid-washed alumina column (Mechoulam and
Gaoni 1965). Merkus isolated cannabivarin (CBN-C3, 66) from Nepalese hashish and confirmed
the structure by mass spectral data (Merkus 1971a, 1971b). Cannabiorcol (67) was identified in
the n-hexane extract of Brazilian marihuana and the structure was confirmed by electron voltage mass fragment intensity graphs (Vree et al. (1972a). Bercht et al. (1973) detected cannabinol
methyl ether (68) from an ethanolic extract of Lebanese hashish. Cannabinol-C4 (CBN-C4, 69)
was detected by GCMS from an ethyl acetate extract of cannabis (Harvey 1976). Cannabinol-C2
(CBN-C2, 70) was identified by Harvey from ethanolic extract of cannabis (Harvey 1985). Ahmed
et al. (2008a) isolated 4-terpenyl cannabinolate (71, Fig. 1.9) from a high-potency variety of
C. sativa through a semipreparative chiral HPLC method. When this compound was analyzed on
GCMS, compound 71 fragmented to CBN and a monoterpenol. From the same variety of cannabis,

OH

OR1

O

R3

O

CBN (64)

CBNA
CBN-C3
cannabiorcol
cannabinol methyl ether
CBN-C4
CBN-C2

R2

(65) R1 = H, R2 = COOH, R3 = C5H11
(66) R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = C3H7
(67) R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = CH3
(68) R1 = CH3, R2 = H, R3 = C5H11
(69) R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = C4H9
(70) R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = C2H5
HO

OH O
OR

OH
R

R=
O

O
4-terpenyl cannabinolate (71)

Fig. 1.9 Cannabinol (CBN) type cannabinoids.

8-OH-CBN (72)
8-OH-CBNA (73)

R=H
R = COOH

CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS SATIVA

8-hydroxycannabinol (8-OH-CBN, 72) and 8-hydroxy cannabinolic acid A (8-OH-CBNA, 73)
(Fig. 1.9) were isolated (Radwan et al. 2009). Compound 72, was isolated for the first time from
a natural source using C18 solid phase extraction (SPE) although it was prepared earlier synthetically (Novak and Salemink 1983).
1.2.1.10 Cannabitriol (CBT) type

Obata and Ishikawa (1966) reported cannabitriol, but its chemical structure was elucidated
by Chan et al. (1976) while its stereochemistry was determined by X-ray analysis (McPhail
et al. 1984). A total of nine CBT-type cannabinoids, (−)-trans-cannabitriol ((−)-trans-CBTC5, 74), (+)-trans-cannabitriol ((+)-trans-CBT-C5, 75), cis-cannabitriol ((±)-cis-CBT-C5, 76),
(−)-trans-10-ethoxy-9-hydroxy-Δ6a(10a)-tetrahydrocannabinol ((−)-trans-CBT-OEt-C5, 77),
trans-cannabitriol-C3 ((±)-trans-CBT-C3, 78), CBT-C3-homologue (79), trans-10-ethoxy-9hydroxy-Δ6a(10a)-tetrahydrocannabivarin-C3 ((−)-trans-CBT-OEt-C3 80), 8,9-dihydroxy-Δ6a(10a)tetrahydrocannabinol (8-OH-CBT-C5, 81), and cannabidiolic acid tetrahydrocannabitriol ester
(CBDA-C5 9-O-CBT-C5 ester, 82) (Fig. 1.10), were reported in cannabis (Ross and ElSohly 1995).
Compounds 75 and 77 were isolated from an ethanolic extract of cannabis by ElSohly et al. in
1977. The ethanolic extract was chromatographed on silica gel 60 followed by TLC grade silica gel
rechromatography. Chan et al. (1976) reported specific rotation of −107° for (−)-trans-CBT-C5.
(+)-Trans-CBT-C5 had a rotation of +7° which indicated that the isolated (+)-trans-CBT-C5 was
a partially racemized mixture. Compounds 76 and 81 were obtained from a hexane extract of an
Indian variant by silica gel chromatography (ElSohly et al. 1978). CBDA-C5 9-O-CBT-C5 ester
(82) was isolated by Von Spulak et al. (1968) from a petroleum ether extract of hashish. As ethanol
was used in the isolation of the two ethoxy cannabitriols (77 and 80), they are most likely artifacts
(ElSohly et al. 1978; Harvey 1985), possibly resulting from the reaction of ethanol with the corresponding 9,10-epoxy-derivative.

OH

OH
R

OH

R

OH

O

O
(–)-trans-CBT-C5

(74) R = OH

(–)-trans-CBT-C5

(75) R = OH

(±)-cis-CBT-C5

(76) R = OH

(±)-trans-CBT-C3

(78) R = OH

CBT-C3 homologue

(79) R = OH

(–)-trans-CBT-OEt-C3 (80) R = OCH2CH3

(–)-trans-CBT-OEt-C5 (77) R = OCH2CH3
HO

OH

OR
OH

OH

OH

OH O
OH

R=
HO

O
8-OH-CBT-C5 (81)

Fig. 1.10 Cannabitriol (CBT) type cannabinoids.

O
CBDA-C5 9-O-CBT-C5 ester (82)

13

14

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

O

O

O

OH HO

HO

HO
dehydrocannabifuran (DCBF-C5)

cannabifuran (CBF-C5)

(83)

(84)

O

O

OH

(85)

O

O

OH

R

O

O

cannabichromanone-C5
(CBCN-C5), (86) R = CH2CH3
cannabichromanone-C3
(CBCN-C3), (87) R = H

O

cannabicitran (CBR-C5)
(88)

OH

OH

H

8-hydroxy-isohexahydrocannabivirin
(OH-iso-HHCV-C3)

OH
H

H

OH

OH
OH
HO
HO

H

O

10-OXO-Δ6a(10a)-tetrahydrocannabinol
(OTHC)
(89)

O
cannabiripsol (CBR) (91)

9

(–)-Δ -cis-(6aS, 10aR)-tetrahydrocannabinol
(cis-Δ9-THC) (90)
7

O
cannabitetrol (CBTT) (92)

OH

R

O
(±)-Δ7-cis-isotetrahydrocannabivarin-C3 (Cis-iso-Δ7-THCV),

(93) R = H

(−)-Δ7-trans-(1R, 3R, 6R)-isotetrahydrocannabivarin-C3 (trans-iso-7-THCV), (94) R = H
7
7
(−)-Δ -trans-(1R, 3R, 6R)-isotetrahydrocannabinol-C5 (trans-iso-Δ -THCV), (95) R = CH2CH3

OH
1
O

H

O

O

OH

7

O

O
cannabichromanone-B

H

OH

H

O
cannabichromanone-C

H

O
R

O
(–)-7R-cannabicourmarone, (99) R = H
(–)-7R-cannabicourmaronic acid, (100) R = COOH

Fig. 1.11 Miscellaneous-type cannabinoids.

O

O

O
cannabichromanone-D

(97)

(96)
O

O

(98)
OH
2 1

5
4 OH
OAc
4-acetoxy-2-geranyl-5-hydroxy-3-n-pentylphenol (101)
3

CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS SATIVA

2

O
1
5

3

O

4

OH

2-geranyl-5-hydroxy-3-n-pentyl-1,4-benzoquinone (102)

6

O
1

AcO 5

4

3
O

5-acetoxy-6-geranyl-3-n-pentyl-1,4-benzoquinone (103)

O

O
cannabioxepane (CBX) (104)

Fig. 1.11 (continued)

1.2.1.11 Miscellaneous-type cannabinoids

Miscellaneous-type cannabinoids discovered up to 2005 have been represented in a review by
ElSohly and Slade (2005). These compounds are of diverse chemical structures. Fig. 1.11 shows
the structure of these compounds as well as of additional compounds discovered after the ElSohly
and Slade review (Ahmed et al. 2008b; Appendino et al. 2011; Pagani et al. 2011; Radwan et al.
(2008b, 2009). Cannabichromanone-B (96), -C (97), and -D (98) were isolated by Ahmed et al.
(2008b) from a high-potency cannabis variety, using C18 semipreparative HPLC. The absolute
configuration was assigned on the basis of Mosher ester analysis and inspection of their circular
dichroism spectra. (−)-7R-Cannabicoumarononic acid (100), 4-actoxy-2-geranyl-5-hydroxy3-n-pentylphenol (101), and 2-geranyl-5-hydroxy-3-n-pentyl-1,4-benzoquinone (102) have been
isolated from buds and leaves of the same variety of cannabis by application of several chromatographic techniques, including VLC over silica gel, solid phase extraction columns (C18 SPE) and
NP HPLC (Radwan et al. 2009). The circular dichroism (CD) spectrum of 100 showed a positive
cotton effect (CE) at 246 nm and negative CE at 295 nm, indicating a 7R absolute configuration.
In addition, 5-acetoxy-6-geranyl-3-n-pentyl-1,4-benzoquinone (103) was isolated by employing
silica gel column chromatography followed by NP HPLC (Radwan et al. 2008b). A tetracyclic
cannabinoid (cannabioxepane, CBX, 104) was recently isolated from C. sativa, variety carmagnole
(Pagani et al. 2011).
1.2.2 Noncannabinoid constituents

Hundreds of noncannabinoid constituents belonging to a highly diverse chemical class have been
identified in/isolated from cannabis (ElSohly and Slade 2005; Ross and ElSohly 1995; Turner et al.
1980). Twenty-two noncannabinoids (105–126) belonging to eight different chemical classes have
been reported since 2005. These new constituents and their chemical classes are described in the
following sections (sections 1.2.2.1–1.2.2.8).
1.2.2.1 Flavonoids

Since 2005, a total of four new flavonoids (105–108) have been reported (Fig. 1.12). Radwan
et al. (2008b) isolated canflavin C (105), chrysoeriol (106), and 6-prenylapigenin (107) from a
high-potency variety of cannabis using combinations of NP and RP chromatography. The flavonoid glycoside apigenin-6,8-di-C-β-D-glucopyranoside (108) was isolated from the n-butanol
fraction of the methanol extract of hemp leaves and branches (Cheng et al. 2008).

15

16

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

R2
3'

R1
HO

7

R 6

4'

O

8
5
OH

OH OH

OH
HO
HO
HO

O

OH HO

canflavin C
(105) R= H, R1=
chrysoeriol
(106) R= R1 = H,
6-prenylapigenin (107) R=

R2 = OMe
R1 = R2 = H

OH

O

O
OH

R2 = OMe

OH
O

OH

O

apigenin-6,8-di-C-β-D-glucopyranoside (108)

Fig. 1.12 Flavonoids.
1.2.2.2 Steroids

A total of four new steroids (109–112) have been reported since 2005 (Fig. 1.13). β-sitosteryl-3O-β-D-glucopyranoside-2′-O-palmitate (109) was isolated from a high-potency variety of cannabis (Radwan et al. 2008b) using NP and RP chromatographic techniques. Cheng et al. (2008)
isolated acetyl stigmasterol (110) and α-spinosterol (111) from the petroleum ether fraction of the
methanol extract of the leaves and branches of hemp, while daucosterol (112) was isolated from
the fruits of cannabis (Qian et al. 2009). Purification of the latter was carried out using silica gel
column and Sephadex® LH-20 chromatography.
1.2.2.3 Phenanthrenes

Four phenanthrene derivatives (113–116) have been reported since 2005 (Fig. 1.14). Radwan
et al. (2008b) isolated 4,5-dihydroxy-2,3,6-trimethoxy-9,10-dihydrophenanthrene (113),
4-hydroxy-2,3,6,7-tetramethoxy-9,10-dihydrophenanthrene (114) and 4,7-dimethoxy-1,2,5trihydroxyphenanthrene (115) from the ethanolic extract of a high-potency cannabis variety

OH
HO
OH

O
OCO(CH2)14CH3

AcO

β-sitosteryl-3-O-β-D-glucopyranoside-2´-O-palamite (109)

OH

HO

HO

α-spinasterol (111)

Fig. 1.13 Steroids.

acetyl stigmasterol (110)

OH

O
OH

daucosterol (112)

CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS SATIVA

OH R
3 4
5

MeO
MeO

2

10

OMe
6
R1
7

HO

9

4,5-dihydroxy-2,3,6-trimethoxy9,10-dihydroxy-phenanthrene
4-hydroxy-2,3,6,7-tetramethoxy9,10-dihydrophenanthrene

7 OMe

HO

(113) R = OH, R1 = H

4,7-dimethoxy-1,2,5-trihydroxyphenanthrene (115)

(114) R = H, R1 = OMe
MeO

2

OH
OMe
5
4

O MeO

OMe

MeO
O
9,10-dihydro-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxyphenanthrene-1,4-dione (116)

Fig. 1.14 Phenanthrenes.

using combination of NP and RP chromatographic techniques. On the other hand, Cheng et al.
(2010) isolated 9,10-dihydro-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxyphenanthrene-1,4-dione (116) from the leaves
and branches of C. sativa L. by silica gel and Sephadex® LH-20 chromatography, followed by semipreparative liquid chromatography.
1.2.2.4 Fatty acids

Four fatty acids were reported in cannabis since 2005 (117–120) (Fig. 1.15). Docosanoic acid
methyl ester (117) was isolated from the petroleum ether fraction of the methanol extract of hemp
leaves and branches (Cheng et al. 2008) and isoselachoceric acid (118) was isolated from the fruits
of cannabis and purified by silica gel chromatography (Qian et al. 2009). In addition, two polyunsaturated hydroxyl-C18 fatty acids (119–120) were reported from a fiber cultivar of cannabis (variety carmagnola) and purified by RP C18 flash chromatography and NP HPLC (Pagani et al. 2011).
1.2.2.5 Spiroindans

Two spiroindans (121, 122) were isolated since 2005 (Fig. 1.16). Radwan et al. (2008a) isolated
7-methoxy-cannabispirone from the extract of a high-potency cannabis variety using NP chromatography followed by C18 HPLC, while Pagani (2011) isolated isocannabispiradienone (122)
from the extract of a fiber cultivar.

O
OMe
18
docosanoic acid methyl ester (117)

20

(119)

isoselachoceric acid (118)

polyunsaturated hydroxy fatty acid

COOH
OH

(120)

polyunsaturated hydroxy fatty acid

Fig. 1.15 Fatty acids.

COOH

OH

COOH

17

18

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

HO

MeO

MeO

MeO

O

O

Fig. 1.16 Spiroindans.

Isocannabispiradienone (122)

7-methoxy-cannabispirone (121)

1.2.2.6 Nitrogenous compounds

The two nitrogenous compounds isolated from cannabis since 2005 are uracil (123) and cannabsin (124) (Fig. 1.17). Uracil (123) was isolated from the n-butanol fraction of the methanolic
extract of hemp leaves and branches (Cheng et al. 2008), while cannabsin (124) was isolated from
the fruits of C. sativa and purified by silica gel column and Sephadex® LH-20 chromatography
(Qian et al. 2009).
1.2.2.7 Xanthones

Only one xanthone derivative, 1,3,6,7-tetrahydroxy-2-C-β-D-gluco-pyranosylxanthone (125),
was reported since 2005 (Fig. 1.18). The compound was isolated from the n-butanol fraction of a
methanolic extract of hemp leaves and branches (Cheng et al. 2008).

O

H
N

O

OH

HO

HN

HO

O

uracil (123)

Fig. 1.17 Nitrogenous compounds.

HO

N
N
H

cannabsin (124)

OH

OHOH
40 HO
O OH O

OH

HO
HO

Fig. 1.18 Xanthones.

O

OH

1,3,6,7-tetrahydroxy-2-C-β-D-glucopyranosyl xanthone
(125)

HO
OH
HO

Fig. 1.19 Biphenyls.

5'-methyl-4-pentylbiphenyl-2,6,2'-triol
(126)

OH

OH

CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS SATIVA

1.2.2.8 Biphenyls

The only biphenyl derivative reported in cannabis since 2005 is 5′-methyl-4-pentyl-2,6,2′trihydroxybiphenyl (126) (Fig. 1.19), which was isolated from a high-potency cannabis variety
and purified by a combination of NP chromatography and C18 HPLC (Radwan et al. 2008a).

Acknowledgments
Author’s contribution to the Work was done as part of the Author’s official duties as an NIH
employee and is a Work of the United States Government. Therefore, copyright may not be established in the United States. The authors are indebted to Ms. Candice Tolbert for her technical
assistance in the production of this chapter.

References
Abrams, D.I., Jay, C.A., Shade, S.B., et al. (2007). Cannabis in painful HIV-associated sensory neuropathy:
a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Neurology, 68, 515–521.
Adams, R., Baker, B.R., and Wearn, R.B. (1940b). Structure of cannabinol III. Synthesis of cannabinol,
1-hydroxy-3-n-amyl-6,6,9-trimethyl-6-dibenzopyran. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 62,
2204–2207.
Adams, R., Hunt, M., and Clark, J.H. (1940a). Structure of cannabidiol, a product isolated from
the marihuana extract of Minnesota wild hemp. I. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 62,
196–200.
Ahmed, S.A., Ross, S.A., Slade, D., et al. (2008a). Cannabinoid ester constituents from high-potency
Cannabis sativa. Journal of Natural Products, 71, 536–542.
Ahmed, S.A., Ross, S.A., Slade, D., et al. (2008b). Structure determination and absolute configuration of cannabichromanone derivatives from high potency Cannabis sativa. Tetrahedron Letters, 49,
6050–6053.
Appendino, G., Chianese, G., and Taglialatela-Scafati, O. (2011). Cannabinoids: occurrence and medicinal chemistry. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 18, 1085–1099.
Appendino, G., Giana, A., Gibbons, S., et al. (2008). A polar cannabinoid from Cannabis sativa var.
Carma. Natural Product Communications, 12, 1977–1980.
Archer, R.A., Boyd, D.B., Demarco, P.V., Tyminski, I.J., and Allinger, N.L. (1970). Structural studies of
cannabinoids. A theoretical and proton magnetic resource analysis. Journal of the American Chemical
Society, 92, 5200–5206.
Bercht, C.A.L., Lousberg, R.J.J.CH., Küppers, F.J.E.M., et al. (1973). Cannabis. VII. Identification of cannabinol methyl ether from hashish. Journal of Chromatography, 81, 163–166.
Chan, W.R., Magnus, K.E., and Watson, H.A. (1976). The structure of cannabitriol. Experientia 32,
283–284.
Cheng, L., Kong, D., and Hu, G. (2008). Study on hemp I. Chemical constituents from petroleum ether and
n-butanol portions of the methanol extract. Chinese Journal of Pharmaceutics, 39, 18–21.
Cheng, L., Kong, D., Hu, G., and Li, H. (2010). A new 9,10-dihydrophenanthrenedione from Cannabis
sativa. Chemistry of Natural Compounds, 46, 710–712.
Claussen, U., Von Spulak, F., and Korte, F. (1966). The chemical classification of plants –XXXI,
Hashish-10. Cannabichromene, a new Hashish component. Tetrahedron, 22, 1477–1479.
Claussen, U., Von Spulak, F., and Korte, F. (1968). Hashish. XIV. Components of hashish. Tetrahedron 24,
1021–1023.
ElSohly, M.A., Boerenm, E.G., and Turner, C.E. (1978). (±)-9,10-Dihydroxy-Δ6a(10a)-tetrahydrocannabinol
and (±)-8,9-dihydroxy-Δ6a(10a)-tetrahydrocannabinol: 2 new cannabinoids from Cannabis sativa L.
Experientia 34, 1127–1128.

19

20

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

ElSohly, M.A., El-Feraly, F.S., and Turner, C.E. (1977). Isolation and characterization of (−)-cannabitrol
and (−)-10-ethoxy-9-hydroxy-Δ6a(10a)-tetrahydrocannabinol: two new cannabinoids form Cannabis
sativa L. extract. Lloydia, 40, 275–280.
ElSohly, M.A. and Slade, D. (2005). Chemical constituents of marijuana: the complex mixture of natural
cannabinoids. Life Sciences, 78, 539–548.
Farnsworth, N.R. (1969). Pharmacognosy and chemistry of Cannabis sativa. Journal of American Pharmacists
Association, N59, 410.
Fetterman, P.S. and Turner, C.E. (1972). Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. I: propyl homologs of cannabinoids from an Indian variant. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 61, 1476–1477.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964a). Hashish. III. Isolation, structure, and partial synthesis of an active
constituent of hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86, 1646–1647.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964b). Structure and synthesis of cannabigerol, a new hashish constituent.
Proceedings of the Chemical Society, 82.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1966). Cannabichromene, a new active principle in hashish. Chemical
Communications, 1, 20–21.
Gill, E.W. (1971). Propyl homologue of terahydrocannabinol: its isolation from cannabis, properties, and
synthesis. Journal of the Chemical Society C, 579–582.
Guindon, J. and Hohmann, A.G. (2009). The endocannabinoid system and pain. CNS & Neurological
Disorders: Drug Targets, 8, 403–421.
Hanuŝ, L. and Krejčí, Z. (1975). Isolation of two new cannabinoid acids from Cannabis sativa L. of
Czechoslovakia origin. Acta Universitatis Palackianae Olomucensis Facultatis Medicae, 74, 161.
Harvey, D.J. (1976). Characterization of the butyl homologues of Δ1-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabinol,
and cannabidiol in samples of Cannabis by combined gas chromatography and mass spectrometry.
Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 28, 280–285.
Harvey, D.J. (1985). Examination of a 140 year old ethanolic extract of Cannabis: identification of new cannabitriol homologues and the ethyl homologue of cannabinol. In: D.J. Harvey, W. Paton, and
G.G. Hahas (eds.). Marihuana ’84: Proceedings of the Oxford symposium on Cannabis: 9th International
Congress of Pharmacology, 3rd Satellite Symposium on Cannabis. Washington, DC: IRL, pp. 23–30.
Hively, R.L., Mosher, W.A., and Hoffman, F.W. (1966). Isolation of trans-Δ6-tetrahydrocannabinol from
marijuana. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 8, 1832–1833.
Jarvinen, T., Pate, D.W., and Laine, K. (2002). Cannabinoids in the treatment of glaucoma Pharmacology
and Therapeutics, 95, 203–220.
Korte, F., Haag, M., and Claussen, U. (1965a). Tetrahydrocannabinolcarboxylic acid, a component of hashish. Angewandte Chemie, 77, 862–867.
Korte, F. and Sieper, H. (1964). Chemical classification of plants. XXIV. Hashish constituents by thin-layer
chromatography. Journal of Chromatography, 13, 90–98.
Korte, F., Sieper, H., and Tira, S. (1965b). New results on hashish-specific constituents. Bulletin on
Narcotics, 17, 35.
Krejčí, Z. and Šantavý, F. (1955). The isolation of further substances from the leaves of Indian hemp
(Cannabis sativa L., var. indica). Acta Universitatis Palackianae Olomucensis, Faculty of Medicine, 6, 59–66.
Kriese, U., Schumann, E., Weber, W.E., et al. (2004). Oil content, tocopherol composition and fatty acid
patterns of the seeds of 51 C. sativa L. genotypes. Euphytica, 137, 339–351.
Liang, Y.C., Huang, C.C., and Hsu, K.S. (2004). Therapeutic potential of cannabinoids in trigeminal neuralgia. Current Drug Targets: CNS & Neurological Disorders, 3, 507–514.
Lousberg, R.J.J.C., Bercht, C.A.L., van Ooyen, R., and Spronck, H.J.W. (1977). Cannabinodiol: conclusive
identification and synthesis of a new cannabinoid from Cannabis sativa. Phytochemistry, 16, 595–597.
McPhail, A.T., ElSohly, H.N., Turner, C.E., and ElSohly, M.A. (1984). Stereochemical assignments for the
two enantiomeric pairs of 9,10-dihydroxy-Δ6a(10a)-tetrahydrocannabinols. X-ray crystal structure analysis of (±)-trans-cannabitriol. Journal of Natural Products, 47, 138–142.

CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS SATIVA

Mechoulam, R., Ben-Zvi, Z., Yagnitinsky, B., and Shani, A. (1969). A new tetrachydrocannabinolic acid.
Tetrahedron Letters, 28, 2339–2341.
Mechoulam, R. and Gaoni, Y. (1965). The isolation and structure of cannabinolic, cannabidiolic and cannabigerolic acids. Tetrahedron, 21, 1223–1229.
Mechoulam, R. and Gaoni, Y. (1967). Recent advances in the chemistry of hashish. Fortschritte der Chemie
Organischer Naturstoffe, 25, 175–213.
Mechoulam, R. and Yagen, Y. (1969). Stereoselective cyclizations of cannabinoid 1,5 dienes. Tetrahedron
Letters, 10, 5349–5352.
Merkus, F.W.H.M. (1971a). Cannabivarin, een nieuw bestanddeel van haschisch. Pharmaceutisch weekblad.
Scientific edition, 106, 69.
Merkus, F.W.H.M. (1971b). Cannabivarin and tetrahydrocannabivarin, two new constituents of hashish.
Nature, 232, 579–580.
Merlin, M.D. (2003). Archaeological evidence for the tradition of psychoactive plant use in the old world.
Economic Botany, 57, 295–323.
Morita, M. and Ando, H. (1984). Analysis of hashish oil by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry.
Kagaku Keisatsu Kenkyujo Hokoku. Hokagaku-Hen, 37(2), 137–140.
Novak, J. and Salemink, C.A. (1983). Cannabis. XXVII: Synthesis of 8-, 10-, and 11-oxygenated cannabinols. Journal of the Chemical Society, Perkin Trans, 12, 2867–2871.
Obata, Y. and Ishikawa, Y. (1966). Constituents of hemp plant (Cannabis sativa ). III. Isolation of a Gibbspositive compound from Japanese hemp. Agricultural and Biological Chemistry, 30, 619–620.
Pagani, A., Scala, F., Chianese, G., et al. (2011). Cannabioxepane, a novel tetracyclic cannabinoid from
hemp, Cannabis sativa L. Tetrahedron, 67, 3369–3373.
Petrzilka, T., Haefliger, W., and Sikemeier, C. (1969). Synthesis of hashish components. IV. Helvetica
Chimica Acta, 52, 1102–1134.
Pollastro, F., Taglialatela-Scafati, O., Allarà, M., et al. (2011). Bioactive prenylogous cannabinoid from
fiber hemp (Cannabis sativa). Journal of Natural Products, 74, 2019–2022.
Pryce, G. and Baker, D. (2005). Emerging properties of cannabinoid medicines in management of multiple
sclerosis. Trends in Neuroscience, 28, 272–276.
Qian, S., Cai, G.-M., He, G.-X., and Du, F.L. (2009). Study of the chemical constituents of the fruits of
C. sativa L. Natural Product Research and Development, 21, 784–786.
Radwan, M.M., ElSohly, M.A., Slade, D., et al. (2008b). Non-cannabinoid constituents from a high potency Cannabis sativa variety. Phytochemistry, 69, 2627–2633.
Radwan, M.M., ElSohly, M.A., Slade, D., Ahmed, S.A., Ross, S.A. (2009). Biologically active cannabinoids
from high potency Cannabis sativa. Journal of Natural Products, 72, 906–911.
Radwan, M.M., Ross, S.A., Slade, D., et al. (2008a). Isolation and characterization of new cannabis constituents from a high potency variety. Planta Medica, 74, 267–272.
Rosenqvist, E. and Ottersen, T. (1975). The crystal and molecular structure of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol
acid B. Acta Chemica Scandinavia B, 29(3), 379–384.
Ross, S.A. and ElSohly, M.A. (1995). Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. XXVIII. A review of the natural
constituents: 1980–1994. Zagazig Journal of Pharmaceutical Science, 4, 1–10.
Schultz, O.E. and Haffner, G. (1960). Archives of Pharmaceutical Research, 293, 1.
Shani, A. and Mechoulam, R. (1974). Cannabielsoic acids. Isolation and synthesis by a novel oxidative
cyclization. Tetrahedron, 30, 2437–2446.
Shoyama, Y., Fujita, T., Yamauchi, T., and Nishioka, I. (1968). Cannabichromenic acid, a genuine substance of cannabichromene. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 10(6), 1157–1158.
Shoyama, Y., Kuboe, K., Nishioka, I., and Yamauchi, T. (1972a). Cannabidiol monomethyl ether. A new
neutral cannabinoid. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 20(9), 2072.
Shoyama, Y., Oku, R., Yamauchi, T., and Nishioka, I. (1972b). Cannabis. VI. Cannabicyclolic acid.
Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 20, 1927–1930.

21

22

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Shoyama, Y., Hirano, H., Makino, H., Umekita, N., and Nishioka, I. (1977). Cannabis. X. The isolation
and structures of four new propyl cannabinoid acids, terahydrocannabivarinic acid, cannabidivarinic
acid, cannabichromevarinic acid and cannabigerovarinic acid from Thai cannabis, ‘Meao Variant’.
Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 26(9), 2306–2311.
Shoyama, Y., Hirano, H., Oda, M., Somehara, T., and Nishioka, I. (1975). Cannabichromevarin and
cannabigerovarin, two new propyl homologues of cannabichromene and cannabigerol. Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 23(8), 1894–1895.
Shoyama, Y., Morimoto, S., and Nishioka, I. (1981). Cannabis. XIV. Two new propyl cannabinoids,
cannabicyclovarin and Δ7-cis-iso-tetrahydrocannabivarin, from Thai cannabis. Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 29, 3720–3723.
Shoyama, Y., Yamauchi, T., and Nishioka, I. (1970). Cannabis. V. Cannabigerolic acid monomethyl ether
and cannabinolic acid. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 18, 1327–1332.
Slatkin, N.E. (2007). Cannabinoids in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting:
beyond prevention of acute emesis. Journal of Supportive Oncology, 5, 1–9.
Small, E. and Marcus, D. (2002). Hemp: a new crop with new uses for North America. In: J. Janick and
A. Whipkey (eds.). Trends in New Crops and New Uses. Alexandria, VA: ASHS, pp. 284–326.
Taglialatela-Scafati, O., Pagani, A., Scala, F., et al. (2010). Cannabimovione, a cannabinoid with a rearranged terpenoid skeleton from Hemp. European Journal of Organic Chemistry, 11, 2067.
Taura, F., Morimoto, S., and Shoyama, Y. (1995). Cannabinerolic acid, a cannabinoid from Cannabis
sativa. Phytochemistry, 39(2), 457–458.
Turner, C.E., ElSohly, M.A., and Boeren, E.G. (1980). Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. XVII. A review of
the natural constituents. Journal of Natural Products, 43, 169–234.
Turner, C.E., Hadley, K., and Fetterman, P.S. (1973). Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. VI: propyl
homologs in samples of known geographical origin. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 62, 1739–1741.
Uliss, D.B., Razdan, R.K., and Dalzell, H.C. (1974). Stereospecific intramolecular epoxide cleavage by phenolate anion. Synthesis of novel and biologically active cannabinoids. Journal of the American Chemical
Society, 96 (23), 7372–7374.
Viveros, M.P. and Marco, E.M. (2007). Cannabinoids, anxiety and depression. In: J.N. Govil, V.K. Singh,
and N.T. Siddqui (eds.). Natural Products II. Vol. 18. New York: Studium Press, LLC, pp. 227–249.
Vollner, L., Bieniek, D., and Korte, F. (1969). Haschisch XX. Cannabidivarin, ein neuer Haschischinhaltsstoff. Tetrahedron Letters, 3, 145–147.
Von Spulak, F., Claussen, U., Fehlhaber, H.W., and Korte, F. (1968). Haschisch-XIX. Cannabidiol
carbonsaure-­tetrahydrocannabitrol-ester ein neuer haschisch-inhaltsstoff. Tetrahedron, 24, 5379–5383.
Vree, T.B., Breimer, D.D., Van Ginneken, C.A.M., and Van Rossum, J.M. (1972a). Identification in hashish of tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and cannabinol analogues with a methyl side-chain. Journal of
Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 24, 7–12.
Vree, T.B., Breimer, D.D., van Ginneken, C.A.M., and van Rossum, J.M. (1972b). Identification of cannabicyclol with a pentyl or propyl side chain by means of combined gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Journal of Chromatography, 74, 124–127.
Wood, T.B., Spivey, W.T., and Easterfield, T.H. (1896). XL-Charas. The resin of Indian hemp. Journal of
the Chemical Society, 69, 539–546.
Wood, T.B., Spivey, W.T., and Easterfield, T.H. (1899). III-Cannabinol. Part I. Journal of the Chemical
Society, 75, 20–36.
Yamauchi, T., Shoyama, Y., Matsuo, Y., and Nishioka, I. (1968) Cannabigerol monomethyl ether, a new
component of hemp. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 16(6), 1164–1165.
Yamamoto, I., Gohda, H., Narimatsu, S., Watanabe, K., and Yoshimura, H. (1991). Cannabielsoin as a
new metabolite of cannabidiol in mammals. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 40, 541–546.
Zulfiqar, F., Ross, S.A., and Slade, D., et al. (2012). Cannabisol, a novel Δ9-THC dimer possessing a unique
methylene bridge, isolated from Cannabis sativa. Tetrahedron Letters, 53, 3560–3562.

Chapter 2

The Pharmacological History
of Cannabis
Ethan B. Russo

2.1 Introduction
The circumstances whereby cannabis was first used medicinally are lost in time and mystery. More
than likely, it happened at many times and in many places with rediscoveries figuring prominently
alongside the landscape of human peregrinations and conquests in a rapidly changing mosaic of
Eurasian languages and cultures, a process this author has termed “cannabis interruptus” (Russo
2001b, 2004a, 2007). As a ubiquitous “camp follower,” cannabis accompanied the early nomads
around the Old World for millennia, as they deciphered that certain plants were better for fiber,
others for edible seed, while certain chemovars were pharmacologically superior. Rarely does a
triple-purpose plant appear in nature, such as that discovered in Nepal (Clarke 2007).
The breadth of cannabis history does not lend itself to comprehensive treatment in a brief
chapter. Rather, this effort will focus on a chronology (Table 2.1), followed by some possible new
therapeutic directions.

2.2 Pharmacology of cannabis chronology
Table 2.1 Cannabis chronology
2700 bce

Oral tradition in Shen Nong Ben Cao Jing notes
hallucinatory effects, appetite stimulation, tonic and
antisenility effects

Shou-Zhong 1997

c.2000 bce

Cannabis seeds in Margiana, Proto-Zoroastrian site, part
of religious rites

Sarianidi 1998

c.1800 bce

30 citations from Ancient Sumeria and Akkadia for grief,
epilepsy, neuralgia, and pediculocide

Babylon and Thompson 1903;
Russo 2007; Thompson 1924;
1949

1534 bce

Ebers Papyrus, Egypt, for vaginal contractions,
ophthalmological conditions, etc.

Manniche 1989; Russo 2007

c.1500 bce

Atharva Veda notes bhanga to “release us from anxiety”

Grierson 1894; Indian Hemp
Drugs Commission 1894; Russo
2005

c.750 bce

Kaneh bosem (aromatic cane) part of holy anointing oil
of Hebrews (Exodus 30:22-25)

Alter 2004; Russo 2007

24

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Table 2.1 (continued) Cannabis chronology
700 bce

Cannabis cache from Yanghai Tombs,Xinjiang;
biochemical and genomic analysis demonstrate THC
chemotype

Jiang et al. 2006; Russo et al.
2008

c.600 bce

Persia: Avesta notes ritual use, and in combination to
produce miscarriage

Darmesteter 1895

450 bce

Intoxication in Central Asian funerary rites, subsequently
documented in frozen tombs in Siberia

Artamonov 1965; Herodotus
1998; Rudenko 1970; Russo 2007

c.214 bce

Erh-Ya, China describes dioecious status, superiority of
males for fiber, females for intoxication

Carr 1979; Russo 2007

First
century ce

“The juice extracted from it when green and instilled is
appropriate for earaches”

Dioscorides and Beck 2011 (p.
248)

First
century ce

Pliny the Elder notes gelotophyllis (“Leaves of laughter”
from Bactria) producing hallucinations; also hemp
infusion for looseness in beasts of burden, root for joint
contractures and gout, herb for burns

Pliny 1951 (Book XX, Ch. 98, p.
298), 1980 (Book XXIV, Ch. 164,
p. 117); Russo 2007

Second
century ce

Galen notes leaves for flatus and seed juice for otalgia,
chronic pain

Brunner 1973; Butrica 2002; Sethi
1868

Second
century ce

Hua-Tho in China notes use in wine as surgical
anesthetic/analgesic

Julien 1849

Late second
century ce

Egyptian Fayyum Medical Book for tumors

Reymond 1976; Russo 2007

c.350 ce

Carbonized cannabis found in Israeli cave by remains of
woman dying in childbirth

Zias 1995; Zias et al. 1993

c.550 ce

The Syriac Book of Medicines, for excess spittle, hemp
plug for anal fissures

Budge 1913

570

Taoist incense

Needham and Gwei-Djen 1974

Eighth
century

Psychoactivity noted, Jabir ibn Hayyan in Persia/Iraq

Lewis et al. 1971

c.850

In Persia, ibn Sahl uses compound medicine with flower
juice intranasally for migraine, uterine pains to prevent
miscarriage

Kahl 1994; Russo 2001b, 2002

875

In Iraq, muscle relaxant

Al-Kindi and Levey 1966; Russo
2007

Ninth
century

The Old English Herbarium recommends pounded hemp
or its sap for wounds, and for “pain of the innards”

Pollington 2000 (p. 301)

Ninth
century

Ibn al-Baytar, Egypt, vermicidal, for neuralgia

Lozano 2001

c.900

Al-Razi, Persia, to stimulate hair growth

Lozano 2001

Tenth
century

Hemp part of “holy salve” in Anglo-Saxon Lacnunga

Grattan and Singer 1952 (p. 123)

c.1000

al-Mayusi first mention in epilepsy, leaf juice intanasally

Al-Mayusi 1877; Lozano 2001

THE PHARMACOLOGICAL HISTORY OF CANNABIS

Table 2.1 (continued) Cannabis chronology
Eleventh
century

Roots for fever, tumors, herb juice for ears, and leaves for Ibn Sina (Avicenna), 1294
dandruff

Eleventh
century

Olde English Herbarium, hemp and fat applied to breast
to disperse swelling and purge diseased matter; herb
when drunk to relieve pain of the innards

Vriend 1984

Twelfth
century

In Spain, Sheshet Benveniste recommends theriaca with
cannabis as tonic, curing sterility, repairing the womb,
stomach and head

Barkai 1998

1158

Hildegard von Bingen, for headache, stomach slime, and
compress for sores, wounds

Fankhauser 2002; Hildegard and
Throop 1998

1200

Anandakanda, India, increasing longevity

Russo 2005

Thirteenth
century

Italy, Codex Vindobonensis 93, ointment for breast
swelling, pain

Russo 2002; Zotter 1996

Thirteenth
century

ibn Rasul, headache and ear pains

Lewis et al. 1971

1542

Latin binomial: Cannabis sativa; root boiled for gout, raw Fuchs 1999
for burns, wild hemp boiled, wrapped for tumors

1546

Boiled root for sore muscles, stiff joints, gout,
rheumatism, herb juice for colicky horses, raw on burns

1563

Indian hemp engenders laughter, allays anxiety, increases Da Orta 1913
appetite, improves work

1570

Feckenham cites “hemmp” as part of honey/wine
mixture for wounds, fistulae

Macgill 1990

1596

Li Shi-Chen: flowers for menstrual disorders, root juice
for retained placenta, post-partum hemorrhage

Stuart 1928; Russo 2002

1597

Hemp for jaundice and colic

Gerard and Johnson 1975;
Crawford 2002

Rabelais 1990

Seventeenth In Far East, benefits on mood, gonorrhea, pleurisy, hernia Rumpf and Beekman 1981
century
1621

Indian hemp produces ecstasy, laughter

Burton 1907

Eighteenth
century

In India, Makhzan al-adwiya, leaf snuff for “deterging
the brain,” to remove dandruff and vermin, treat
diarrhea, gonorrhea, powder for wounds, sores, herb to
prolong life

Russo 2005

1712

Psychotropic effects in Persia, India

Kaempfer 1996

1751

Medicina Britannica, hemp precipitates menses, “against Short 1751 (p. 138)
Pissing the Bed”

1772

Linneaus summarizes cannabis: “narcotica, phantastica,
dementans, repellens”

Linné 1772

1784

In Scotland, hemp oil for urinary burning, incontinence
and “restraining venereal appetites”

Lewis 1794

25

26

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Table 2.1 (continued) Cannabis chronology
1830

Extract in wine for nervousness

Nees Von Esenbeck and Ebermaier
1830

1839

O’Shaughnessy studies Indian pharmacopoeia, tests
dogs, then patients, for tetanus, rabies, epilepsy,
rheumatoid disease

O’Shaughnessy 1838–1840

1843

Indian hemp treats cough in tuberculosis, pertussis,
migraine, rheumatic joint pain, gout, morphine
withdrawal

Clendinning 1843; Russo 2001b

1843

Treatment success in convulsions

Pereira 1843

1843

Hashish treats bubonic plague

Aubert-Roche 1843

1843

Testing in psychiatry

Moreau 1845

1845

In Ireland, Donovan treats migraine, neuralgia and
musculoskeletal pain

Donovan 1845, 1851; Russo
2001b

1848

For neuralgia and sleep

Christison 1848

1849

Uterine hemorrhage

Churchill 1849; Russo 2002

1851

Enhances uterine contractions in labor

Christison 1851

1857

Tolerance and reverse tolerance described

Ludlow 1857

1860

Case report in bipolar disease

McMeens 1860

1860

Restores natural sleep in 1000 patients

Fronmüller 1860

1862

Life-saving in hyperemesis gravidarum

Russo 2002; Wright 1863, 1862

1860s

American Civil War, employed for war injuries, with
opium for dysentery

United States. Dept. Of the Army.
Office of the Surgeon General
et al. 1990

1867

Delirium tremens treated with tincture

Tyrell 1867

1870

Melancholia, obsession and anxiety

Polli 1870; Russo 2001a

1883

Mental depression with insomnia

Strange 1883

1886

Ringer endorses for migraine prophylaxis, dysuria, urinary Ringer 1886
retention and dysmenorrhea

1887

Advantages over opiates, distancing from pain

Hare 1887; Russo 2001b

1887

For chronic daily headache

Mackenzie 1887a, 1887b, 1894

1888

Superiority in migraine, tremor of parkinsonism

Gowers 1888

1889

Suppositories for menopause

Farlow 1889; Russo 2002

1890

Touted for migraine, senility, dysmenorrhea, childhood
convulsions, teething

Reynolds 1890; Russo 2001b,
2002

1890

Gastrointestinal pain

Sée 1890

1890

Delirium tremens and cyclic vomiting

Aulde 1890

1891

Cocaine, chloral hydrate and opiate addiction and “it
calms the pain of clap”

Mattison 1891; Russo 2001a

1894

Migraine, syphilitic and functional gastrointestinal pain

Mackenzie 1894

THE PHARMACOLOGICAL HISTORY OF CANNABIS

Table 2.1 (continued) Cannabis chronology
1897

Oromucosal activity

Marshall 1897; Russo 2007

1899

Pain, including herpes zoster

Shoemaker 1899

1900

Dysmenorrhea, malarial symptoms

Lewis 1900

1915

Most satisfactory remedy for migraine

Osler and Mccrae 1915;
Russo 2001b

1934

Psychiatric sequelae reviewed, finding little lasting harm

Bromberg 1934

1942

Menstrual migraine

Fishbein 1942

1944

Loewe reviews cannabinoid pharmacology, structureactivity relationships

New York (N.Y.). Mayor's
Committee on Marihuana. et al.
1944

1947

Duodenal ulcers

Douthwaite 1947

1964

Isolation, synthesis of tetrahydrocannabinol

Gaoni and Mechoulam 1964

1968

Landmark clinical investigation

Weil et al. 1968

1971

Cannabis decreases intraocular pressure

Hepler and Frank 1971

1975

THC antineoplastic in lung adenocarcinoma

Munson et al. 1975

1975

THC antiemetic, cancer chemotherapy

Sallan et al. 1975

1975

THC equi-analgesic to codeine

Noyes et al. 1975

1976

THC equals salbutamol as bronchodilatator

Williams et al. 1976

1981

CBD anticonvulsant in humans

Carlini and Cunha 1981

1981

THC reduces spasticity

Petro and Ellenberger 1981

1982

CBD reduces anxiety after THC

Zuardi et al. 1982

1985

Anti-inflammatory component, cannflavin A,
discovered

Barrett et al. 1985

1985

Marinol®, synthetic THC, approved for chemotherapy
nausea, US

1988

Discovery of cannabinoid receptor, CB1

Devane et al. 1988

1989

CB1 a G-protein-coupled receptor

Matsuda et al. 1990

1991

Cannabis improves night vision in Jamaica and Morocco,
subsequently experimentally demonstrated

Merzouki and Molero Mesa 1999;
Russo et al. 2004a; West 1991

1991

THC has 20 times anti-inflammatory power of aspirin,
twice that of hydrocortisone

Evans 1991

1992

Discovery of endogenous cannabinoid,
arachidonoylethanolamide (anandamide, AEA)

Devane et al. 1992

1993

CB2 receptor identified

Munro et al. 1993

1993

CBD reduces anxiety

Zuardi et al. 1993

1993

Anandamide active in cannabinoid tetrad

Fride and Mechoulam 1993

1994

(Supra)normal development in infants born to mothers
smoking in pregnancy

Dreher et al. 1994

27

28

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Table 2.1 (continued) Cannabis chronology
1995

Endogenous cannabinoid, 2-arachidonoylglycerol

Mechoulam et al. 1995; Sugiura
et al. 1995

1995

Δ8-THC safe, effective in nausea and vomiting in children Abrahamov and Mechoulam 1995
on chemotherapy

1995

CBD improves psychosis

Zuardi et al. 1995

1997

THC reduces agitation in dementia

Volicer et al. 1997

1998

GW Pharmaceuticals begins cultivation, UK

Guy and Stott 2005

1998

“Endocannabinoids” described: “relax, eat, sleep,
forget, and protect”

Di Marzo 1998

1998

Endocannabinoid “entourage effect”

Ben-Shabat et al. 1998;
Mechoulam and Ben-Shabat 1999

1998

THC, CBD, neuroprotective antioxidants

Hampson et al. 1998

1998

THC produces apoptosis in glioma

Sanchez et al. 1998

2000

CBD antagonizes tumor necrosis factor-alpha in
rheumatoid model

Malfait et al. 2000

2001

CBD is a TRPV1 agonist, fatty acid amide hydrolaseinhibitor, stimulator of AEA synthesis

Bisogno et al. 2001

2001

Clinical endocannabinoid deficiency syndrome
hypothesized

Russo 2001a, 2001b, 2004b

2002

CBD antinausea effects

Parker et al. 2002

2003

First trial of Sativex® in multiple sclerosis symptoms

Wade et al. 2003

2003

Smoked cannabis in HIV/AIDS immunologically safe

Abrams et al. 2003

2003

THC, cannabis extract benefit mobility, subjective
spasticity in MS

Zajicek et al. 2003

2003

THC improves Tourette symptoms without
neuropsychological sequelae

Müller-Vahl et al. 2003a, 2003b

2004

Sativex® benefits pain

Notcutt et al. 2004

2004

Cannabis extracts reduce urological symptoms in MS

Brady et al. 2004

2004

Sativex®, high-THC extracts effective in brachial plexus
avulsion pain

Berman et al. 2004

2004

THC reduces MS pain

Svendsen et al. 2004

2004

CBD increases wakefulness, counteracts THC
sedation

Nicholson et al. 2004

2005

Sativex® approved in Canada for neuropathic pain in MS

Rog et al. 2005

2005

THCV CB1 antagonist

Thomas et al. 2005

2005

CBD agonist at serotonin-1A

Russo et al. 2005

2006

CBD, other phytocannabinoids cytotoxic in breast cancer

Ligresti et al. 2006

2006

Sativex reduces pain, disease activity in rheumatoid
arthritis

Blake et al. 2006

THE PHARMACOLOGICAL HISTORY OF CANNABIS

Table 2.1 (continued) Cannabis chronology
2006

CBD enhances adenosine receptor A2A signaling

Carrier et al. 2006

2006

Efficacious in morning sickness

Westphall et al. 2006

2006

Hepatitis C patients using cannabis better adhere to
treatment

Sylvestre et al. 2006

2006

Cannabis lowers lung cancer risk

Hashibe et al. 2006

2007

Sativex® in peripheral neuropathic pain

Nurmikko et al. 2007

2007

Sativex® approved in Canada in opioid-resistant cancer
pain

Johnson et al. 2010

2007

Smoked cannabis in short-term trials of sensory
neuropathy in HIV/AIDS

Abrams et al. 2007a

2007

Vaporization pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics
comparable to smoking

Abrams et al. 2007b

2007

CBD antagonizes CB1 in presence of THC

Thomas et al. 2007

2007

CBD reduces prions, toxicity

Dirikoc et al. 2007

2008

Benefit in short-term study of HIV neuropathy

Ellis et al. 2009

2008

CBD, CBG antibiotic for methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus

Appendino et al. 2008

2008

β-caryophyllene, sesquiterpenoid, potent CB2 agonist

Gertsch et al. 2008

2008

Cannabis effective in brief neuropathic pain trial

Wilsey et al. 2008

2009

Cannabichromene-predominant plant; concentrated as
enriched trichome product

De Meijer et al. 2009; Potter 2009

2010

Sativex® approved UK, Spain for intractable spasticity
in MS

Novotna et al. 2011

2010

Sativex® reduces pain in opioid-resistant cancer

Johnson et al. 2010

2010

THCV anticonvulsant

Hill et al. 2010

2010

Single inhalations reduce neuropathic pain

Ware et al. 2010

2010

Sativex® benefits urological MS symptoms

Kavia et al. 2010

2010

Cannabigerol a potent TRPM8 antagonist for prostate
cancer

De Petrocellis and Di Marzo 2010

2010

THCV reduces hyperalgesia in animals

Bolognini et al. 2010

2010

Cannabidivarin, THCV anticonvulsant

Hill et al. 2010; Jones et al. 2010

2010

Sativex® improves intractable nausea of chemotherapy

Duran et al. 2010

2010

THC attenuates breast cancer

Caffarel et al. 2010

2010

Cannabis genome published

Medicinal Genomics 2012; Van
Bakel et al. 2011

2011

THC, CBD synergize with temozolomide reducing glioma Torres et al. 2011
growth

2012

CBD equals standard antipsychotic

Leweke et al. 2012

29

30

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

2.3 Selected topics
2.3.1 Cannabis and tinnitus

In 1698, Nicholas Lémery wrote, “Hemp contains much oil, little salt, it is specific for burns, for
roaring in the ears, to kill worms,” (Lémery 1727, p. 109, translation EBR). Tinnitus is a nettlesome
syndrome of myriad causes, notoriously recalcitrant to treatment. However, many attestations to
the benefits of cannabis are posted online, and Grinspoon and Bakalar (1997) offered one case
report, and another documents improvement in tinnitus associated with benign intracranial
hypertension by tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) administration (Raby et al. 2006). These claims
gain plausibility when it is considered that the cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1) is expressed in
cochlear nucleus cells, is downregulated in salicylate-treated rats (Zheng et al. 2007), and there is
no epidemiological evidence of recreational cannabis usage increasing tinnitus (Han et al. 2010).
Thus, there is preliminary evidence to support the contention that THC may be helpful, while
Lémery’s report suggests cannabidiol (CBD) may also be beneficial. The latter supposition is supported by indirect evidence. To whit, transient receptor potential vanilloid receptor (TRPV)-4
is expressed in inner ear hair cells (Lowry et al. 2009), wherein CBD is an agonist (Moran et al.
2011). Additionally, since CBD is also a TRPV1 agonist/desensitizer (Bisogno et al. 2001), and the
expression of mouse RNA of TRPV1 is increased after kanamycin administration, while TRPV4
expression is diminished by this tinnitus-producing treatment, suggests that both vanilloid mechanisms may be operative. Therapeutic trials of cannabinoids in humans certainly seem warranted,
particularly with a combination of THC and CBD.
2.3.2 Cannabis and tetanus

In 1838, in India when O’Shaughnessy began experiments, tetanus was virtually uniformly fatal,
even in England (Cock and Wilks 1858). Gowers cited mortality of 90% decades later (Gowers
1888). Prior ethnobotanical use in India for this indication was not apparent in the literature
(Ainslie 1813). O’Shaughnessy essayed it in three cases, all of whom survived the acute disorder,
but with one succumbing to gangrene after refusing amputation (O’Shaughnessy 1838–1840).
Frequent dosing relaxed spasmodic paroxysms, allowing nutrition/hydration until recovery
ensued, sometimes weeks later. He described similar successes in colleagues’ efforts, saving the
lives of three of six affected people. One case report was detailed by his cousin (O’Shaughnessy
1842). Treatment failed in one case for another (Shaw 1843) in India, but in England, Miller saw
success in a 7-year-old treated with cannabis tincture (Miller 1845), who tolerated well a dose
that previously intoxicated an adult. Christison (1848) similarly endorsed for this and other spasmodic diseases. In South Carolina, Gaillard reported two survivors with trismus nascentium, the
infantile form (Gaillard and Desaussure 1853). Another case in an 18-year-old required 110 doses
before cure (Cock and Wilks 1858). Cannabis was utilized successfully in a 9-year-old girl in
Honduras (Skues 1858). In 1863, a Union soldier survived a musket ball wound with compound
radioulnar fractures, tetanus and gangrene after amputation, and cannabis tincture (United States.
Dept. Of the Army. Office of the Surgeon General. et al. 1990, Vol. 12, p. 822). In India, another
case was successfully treated with a combination of cannabis with smoked opium (Fayrer 1865).
In a review article from St. Louis (Roemer 1873), it was observed, “As standard remedies, opium,
cannabis indica and the calabar bean are entitled to the greatest confidence” (p. 377). In India,
Khastagir documented five cures employing smoked cannabis for tetanus to avoid difficult oral
administration, and to titrate effects to spasm severity (Khastagir 1878). Lucas suggested the same
to the West (Lucas 1880). By the end of the century, it was stated, “The treatment of Tetanus by

THE PHARMACOLOGICAL HISTORY OF CANNABIS

smoking GUNJAH (Indian Hemp) . . . promises to supersede all others in India” (Waring 1897,
p. 252). As late as 1962 in India, charas (hashish) was still recommended (Dastur 1962).
Despite worldwide attempts at immunization, tetanus afflicts 100–200 Americans per year, and
1 million victims worldwide with a mortality exceeding 50% (Rowland 2000). Given these striking statistics, and the marked success of modern cannabinoid pharmacology in treating spasticity
(Novotna et al. 2011), prospective treatment for tetanus with Sativex® certainly seems warranted,
especially in developing countries where intensive care and mechanical ventilation for weeks at a
time are unavailable.
2.3.3 Cannabis and burns

Pliny the Elder may have been first to write of the benefit of cannabis for this indication, “It is
applied raw to burns, but it must be frequently changed, so as to not let it dry” (Pliny 1951, Book
XX, Ch. 97, p. 298). Variations of this approach continued for many centuries, with occasional
elaboration. Leonhart Fuchs noted, “The raw root, pounded and wrapped, is good for the burn”
(translation courtesy of Franjo Grotenhermen) (Fuchs 1999). Rabelais advised, “If you want
to cure a burn, no matter whether it be from boiling water or burning wood, just rub on raw
Pantagruelion [hemp], just as it comes out of the earth, without doing anything else. But be careful
to change the dressing when you see it drying out on the wound” (Rabelais 1990, Book III, Ch. 51,
p. 371). Parkinson suggested, “Hempe . . . is good to be used, for any place that hath been burnt
by fire, if the fresh juyce be mixed with a little oyle or butter” (Parkinson et al. 1640). Lémery
noted hemp “specific for burns” (Lémery 1727). William Salmon described various preparations
(Salmon 1710, p. 510):
XVIII. The Oil by Insolation, Infusion, or Decoction. It is good to be applied to any place which is burn’d
with Fire, and to remove inflammation in any part; so also if an Oil of Ointment is made, by mixing the
fresh juice with Oil Olive, or Hogs Lard, or fresh Butter, it heals Burning of Scaldings after an admirable Manner.

Chomel (1782, pp. 369–370) preferred hemp seed for burns (and tumors), “This oil mixed with
a little melted wax, is a good remedy for burns from which it appeases the pain” (translation
EBR). Marcandier (1758, p. 41, translation EBR) recommended a mixture, “Crushed and ground
fresh, with butter in a mortar, one applies to burns, which it soothes infinitely, provided it is often
renewed.” It is noteworthy that all these preparations save the roots employ European hemp,
generally in its raw state. This suggests that further investigation of cannabidiolic acid be undertaken. If any is converted in processing to CBD, then certainly its activity as a TRPV1 agonist/
desensitizer is germane in decreasing both attendant pain and apoptotic cell death after burns
(Radtke et al. 2011).
2.3.4 Cannabis in pediatrics

This author has addressed this topic previously (Russo 2003), but with subsequent advances in
cannabis-based therapeutics, the need to re-examine the issue is clear, in spite of any attendant
controversy. It is a simple truism that any pharmacological agent released to general usage eventually finds application in children, and in fact, regulatory bodies in the European Union and US
now require pediatric clinical trials for all newly approved pharmaceuticals. The questions then
become, not whether to employ cannabis in children, but rather, how to do so safely and for what
indications.
Actually, as the chronology attests, cannabis has been employed in children probably as long
as in any other age group. This is additionally supported by ethnobotanical evidence. In Nepal,

31

32

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

cannabis has been mixed with sweets to calm children while their mothers worked the fields
(Fisher 1975). Cannabis candy is employed in Uzbekistan as an analgesic for boys undergoing
circumcision (Benet 1975). In Jamaica, cannabis is an essential item of the folk pharmacopoeia.
Ganja compresses are utilized for pain and wounds, even in neonates (Comitas 1975). Ganja tea
and tonics are administered for marasmus, infantile diarrhea, teething, and as all-purpose remedies (Dreher 1982). Even noncannabis smokers believe the tea “brainifies” and maintains the
young healthy (Dreher 1982, p. 72). Among Rastafarians, cannabis smoke may be passively blown
towards infants to “make dem smart” and provide “wisdom and health” (Dreher 1982, p. 73). In
Costa Rica in two children with asthma, one treated the malady by smoking cannabis, while the
other abstained, and succumbed to the disease (Carter 1980). In Morocco, cannabis is combined
with mint tea to expel intestinal worms in infants, while infantile diarrhea calls for passive smoke
administration (Merzouki and Molero Mesa 1999).
Powdered cannabis in sugar was used in Berlin to treat paroxysmal coughing in children with
pertussis (Dierbach 1828). In Calcutta, O’Shaughnessy included children in his trials, among
them a 40-day-old infant with convulsions. After 20 days, “The child is now in the enjoyment of
robust health, and has regained her natural plump and happy appearance” (O’Shaughnessy 1838–
1840). Notice quickly spread throughout the British Empire and beyond. Ley followed upon this
success by similarly treating a 9-month-old infant (Ley 1842). In England, Clendinning observed
benefit of cannabis extract in cough of tuberculosis, and pertussis in a 9-week-old with reduced
paroxysms and improved sleep.
Experimentation extended indications in children, including tetanus (vide infra). In Ireland,
success was observed in Sydenham’s (post-streptococcal) chorea (Corrigan 1845). Benefits on
acute and chronic migraine were evident in children (Anstie 1871; Russo 2001b). Reynolds noted
the same, plus benefit in spasmodic dysmenorrhea, infantile convulsions, the “temper disease of
Marshall Hall,” and even infant teething (Reynolds 1890), the latter also espoused in India contemporaneously (Dymock et al. 1890). Its popularity is highlighted by the presence of cannabis in
numerous patent medicines sold for children.
In the twentieth century, Morris Fishbein, editor of the Journal of the American Medical
Association, espoused cannabis in childbirth to aid in a painless labor with no attendant adverse
events for the baby (Anonymous 1930).
More recently, the late Ester Fride pioneered exploration of the role of the endocannabinoid
system in early development, demonstrating it essential to early initiation of feeding and maternal bonding (Fride 2002b), suggesting application in cystic fibrosis (Fride 2002a), neurotrauma,
degenerative diseases, and “non-organic failure to thrive” (Fride 2004, pp. 24–25):
Developmental observations suggest further that CB1 receptors develop only gradually during the
postnatal period, which correlates with an insensitivity to the psychoactive effects of cannabinoid treatment in the young organism.

This statement is further supported by histological studies in human brain development (Glass
et al. 1997), the frequent mention in the nineteenth-century literature that children often tolerated
perfectly well heroic doses of cannabis medicines that would engender prostration in an adult,
and similar attestations in modern clinical use. One compelling example of the latter is the clinical trial in Israel with Δ8-THC, up to 0.64 mg/kg/dose, administered onto the tongues of children
to allay nausea in chemotherapy, in which it was virtually totally effective and free of side effects
(Abrahamov and Mechoulam 1995).
Similarly, in Germany, Lorenz published detailed case reports employing Marinol® (synthetic
THC) 0.04–0.12 mg/kg/d in eight children severely affected with degenerative diseases, epilepsy,

THE PHARMACOLOGICAL HISTORY OF CANNABIS

posttraumatic, and hypoxic encephalopathy (Lorenz 2004). Prominent positive results included
reduced seizures, spasms, improved social interaction, and palliation in terminal cases. Another
case series provides support (Gottschling 2011). Dronabinol (average dose 0.2 mg/kg/d) was
administered to 13 severely neurologically impaired children, aged 7 months to 17 years with
uniform benefit on spasticity and pain, and improved sleep in ten. No tolerance or dose escalation
was apparent in treatment, up to 5 years. More than 50 patients from the age of 3 months were
treated for nausea and inanition from chemotherapy. Marked benefit was noted with no serious
side effects aside from one self-limited case of tenfold accidental overdose, and no withdrawal
effects were seen even after abrupt withdrawal following months of therapy.
An entire book was devoted to a case study of a youngster with severe behavioral abnormalities, controlled by oral cannabis confections (Jeffries and Jeffries 2003), allowing more normal
socialization and mainstream education. Numerous anecdotal accounts claim benefit of cannabis
in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (Grinspoon and Bakalar 1997). As counterintuitive as this may seem, this author (EBR) saw many families and patients in clinical practice
with independent attestation of benefits in ADHD. Support has been evident from animal models, wherein impulsive behavior was reduced by a CB1 agonist (Adriani et al. 2003), or prenatal
treatment of mothers with AM404 (inhibitor of cellular uptake of anandamide) to increase anandamide reduced hyperactivity in progeny (Viggiano et al. 2003). Clinical trials of both THC and
cannabis (Müller-Vahl et al. 2003a, 2003b) have shown promise in treatment of tics and psychiatric symptoms in Tourette syndrome.
In animal experiments, high-dose THC attenuated induced insulitis and hyperglycemia in a
diabetes model (Li et al. 2001), while CBD allowed a lower incidence of diabetes in mice (Weiss
et al. 2006), was neuroprotective and retina-preserving in diabetic animals (El-Remessy et al.
2006), and attenuated myriad pathologies associated with diabetic cardiomyopathy (Rajesh et al.
2010). Clinical work in humans certainly seems indicated in type I diabetic children.
Application of cannabinoids for primary cancer treatment has been evident for centuries,
and came to the fore once again after early experimental studies of THC in animals (Munson
et al. 1975), and in treating human glioblastoma multiforme (Guzman et al. 2006). Recently, two
detailed case studies with magnetic resonance imaging and histology have documented complete
regression of pilocytic astrocytomas in children treated by their parents with cannabis (Foroughi
et al. 2011). Certainly, if such treatment can be effected without psychoactive liability, whether
with THC- or CBD-predominant preparations, future applications could be quite promising to
achieve benefit with lower toxicity than with conventional chemotherapy. Additional possibilities are only limited by the imagination. Clinical cannabis will likely never be fully accepted in
mainstream medicine until it can be proven safe and effective in serious disorders in children. To
restate the issue, “If and when cannabis establishes its efficacy in pediatric diseases, it shall have
achieved a fair measure of redemption from the derision it has elicited during the past century”
(Russo 1998, p. 171).

References
Abrahamov, A. and Mechoulam, R. (1995). An efficient new cannabinoid antiemetic in pediatric oncology.
Life Sciences, 56, 2097–2102.
Abrams, D.I., Hilton, J.F., Leiser, R.J., et al. (2003). Short-term effects of cannabinoids in patients with
HIV-1 infection. A randomized, placbo-controlled clinical trial. Annals of Internal Medicine, 139,
258–266.
Abrams, D.I., Jay, C.A., Shade, S.B., et al. (2007a). Cannabis in painful HIV-associated sensory neuropathy: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Neurology, 68, 515–521.

33

34

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Abrams, D.I., Vizoso, H.P., Shade, S.B., et al. (2007b). Vaporization as a smokeless cannabis delivery system: a pilot study. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 82, 572–578.
Adriani, W., Caprioli, A., Granstrem, O., Carli, M., and Laviola, G. (2003). The spontaneously
hypertensive-­rat as an animal model of ADHD: evidence for impulsive and non-impulsive subpopulations. Neurosciene and Biobehavioral Reviews, 27, 639–651.
Ainslie, W. (1813). Materia Medica of Hindoostan, and Artisan’s and Agriculturist’s Nomenclature. Madras,
India: Printed at the Government Press.
Al-Kindi and Levey, M. (1966). The Medical Formulary, or Aqrabadhin of al-Kindi. Madison, WI: University
of Wisconsin Press.
Al-Mayusi. (1877). Kamil al-sina ‘a al-tibbiyya. Bulaq.
Alter, R. (2004). The Five Books of Moses: A Translation with Commentary. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Anonymous. (1930). Effects of cannabis and alcohol during labor. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 94, 1165.
Anstie, F.E. (1871). Neuralgia and the Diseases that Resemble It. London: Macmillan.
Appendino, G., Gibbons, S., Giana, A., et al. (2008). Antibacterial cannabinoids from Cannabis sativa: a
structure-activity study. Journal of Natural Products, 71, 1427–1430.
Artamonov, M.I. (1965). Frozen tombs of the Scythians. Scientific American, 212, 101–109.
Aubert-Roche, L.R. (1843). De la peste, ou typhus d’Orient. Paris: Just Rouvie.
Aulde, J. (1890). Studies in therapeutics – Cannabis indica. Therapeutic Gazette, 14, 523–526.
Barkai, R. (1998). A history of Jewish gynaecological texts in the Middle Ages. Leiden: Boston, Brill.
Barrett, M. L., Gordon, D., and Evans, F. J. (1985). Isolation from Cannabis sativa L. of cannflavin – a
novel inhibitor of prostaglandin production. Biochemical Pharmacology, 34, 2019–2024.
Ben-Shabat, S., Fride, E., Sheskin, T., et al. (1998). An entourage effect: inactive endogenous fatty
acid glycerol esters enhance 2-arachidonoyl-glycerol cannabinoid activity. European Journal of
Pharmacology, 353, 23–31.
Benet, S. (1975). Early diffusion and folk uses of hemp. In: V. Rubin (ed.). Cannabis and Culture. The
Hague: Mouton.
Berman, J.S., Symonds, C., and Birch, R. (2004). Efficacy of two cannabis based medicinal extracts for
relief of central neuropathic pain from brachial plexus avulsion: results of a randomised controlled trial.
Pain, 112, 299–306.
Bisogno, T., Hanus, L., De Petrocellis, L., et al. (2001). Molecular targets for cannabidiol and its synthetic
analogues: effect on vanilloid VR1 receptors and on the cellular uptake and enzymatic hydrolysis of
anandamide. British Journal of Pharmacology, 134, 845–852.
Blake, D.R., Robson, P., Ho, M., Jubb, R.W., and McCabe, C.S. (2006). Preliminary assessment of the efficacy, tolerability and safety of a cannabis-based medicine (Sativex) in the treatment of pain caused by
rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford), 45, 50–52.
Bolognini, D., Costa, B., Maione, S., et al. (2010). The plant cannabinoid Delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin
can decrease signs of inflammation and inflammatory pain in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology,
160, 677–687.
Brady, C. M., Dasgupta, R., Dalton, C., et al. (2004). An open-label pilot study of cannabis based extracts
for bladder dysfunction in advanced multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis, 10, 425–433.
Bromberg, W. (1934). Marihuana intoxication: a clinical study of Cannabis sativa intoxication. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 91, 303.
Brunner, T.F. (1973). Marijuana in ancient Greece and Rome? The literary evidence. Bulletin of the History
of Medicine, 47, 344–355.
Budge, E. A. W. (1913). The Syriac Book of Medicines: Syrian Anatomy, Pathology and Therapeutics in
the Early Middle Ages with Sections on Astrological and Native Medicine and Recipes. London: Oxford
University Press.

THE PHARMACOLOGICAL HISTORY OF CANNABIS

Burton, R. (1907). The Anatomy of Melancholy. London: Chatto and Windus.
Butrica, J.L. (2002). The medical use of cannabis among the Greeks and Romans. Journal of Cannabis
Therapeutics, 2, 51–70.
Caffarel, M.M., Andradas, C., Mira, E., et al. (2010). Cannabinoids reduce ErbB2-driven breast cancer
progression through Akt inhibition. Molecular Cancer, 9, 196.
Carlini, E.A. and Cunha, J.M. (1981). Hypnotic and antiepileptic effects of cannabidiol. Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 21, 417S–427S.
Carr, M.E. (1979). A Linguistic Study of the Flora and Fuana Sections of the Erh-Ya. Tucson, AZ: University
of Arizona.
Carrier, E.J., Auchampach, J.A., and Hillard, C.J. (2006). Inhibition of an equilibrative nucleoside transporter by cannabidiol: a mechanism of cannabinoid immunosuppression. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103, 7895–7900.
Carter, W.E. (1980). Cannabis in Costa Rica: A Study of Chronic Marihuana Use. Philadelphia, PA: Institute
for the Study of Human Issues.
Chomel, P.J.B. (1782). Abrégé de l'histoire des plantes usuelles. Paris: Libraires Associés.
Christison, A. (1851). On the natural history, action, and uses of Indian hemp. Monthly Journal of Medical
Science of Edinburgh, Scotland, 13, 26–45, 117–121.
Christison, R. (1848). A Dispensatory or Commentary on the Pharmacopoeias of Great Britain and the
United States. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Blanchard.
Churchill, F. (1849). Essays on the Puerperal Fever and Other Diseases Peculiar to Women. London:
Sydenham Society.
Clarke, R.C. (2007). Traditional Cannabis cultivation in Darchula District, Nepal- seed, resin and textiles.
Journal of Industrial Hemp, 12, 19–42.
Clendinning, J. (1843). Observation on the medicinal properties of Cannabis sativa of India. MedicoChirurgical Transactions, 26, 188–210.
Cock, M. and Wilks, D. (1858). Case of recovery from acute and severe traumatic tetanus. Medical Times
and Gazette, 8–9.
Comitas, L. (1975). The social nexus of ganja in Jamaica. In: V. Rubin (ed.) Cannabis and Culture. The
Hague: Mouton Publishers.
Corrigan, O. (1845). Treatment of chorea by the use of Cannabis indica. Medical Times, 12, 291–292.
Crawford, V. (2002). A homelie herbe: medicinal cannabis in early England. Journal of Cannabis
Therapeutics, 2, 71–79.
Da Orta, G. (1913). Colloquies on the Simples and Drugs of India. London: Henry Sotheran.
Darmesteter, J. (1895). Zend-Avesta, Part I, The Vendidad. London: Oxford University.
Dastur, J.F. (1962). Medicinal Plants of India and Pakistan; A concise Work Describing Plants Used for Drugs
and Remedies According to Ayurvedic, Unani and Tibbi Systems and Mentioned in British and American
Pharmacopoeias. Bombay: D.B. Taraporevala Sons.
De Meijer, E.P.M., Hammond, K.M., and Micheler, M. (2009). The inheritance of chemical phenotype in
Cannabis sativa L. (III): variation in cannabichromene proportion. Euphytica, 165, 293–311.
De Petrocellis, L. and Di Marzo, V. (2010). Non-CB1, non-CB2 receptors for endocannabinoids, plant cannabinoids, and synthetic cannabimimetics: focus on G-protein-coupled receptors and transient receptor
potential channels. Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology, 5, 103–121.
Devane, W.A., Dysarz, F.A., 3rd, Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S., and Howlett, A.C. (1988). Determination
and characterization of a cannabinoid receptor in rat brain. Molecular Pharmacology, 34, 605–613.
Devane, W. A., Hanus, L., Breuer, A., et al. (1992). Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds
to the cannabinoid receptor. Science, 258, 1946–1949.
Di Marzo, V. (1998). ‘Endocannabinoids’ and other fatty acid derivatives with cannabimimetic properties:
biochemistry and possible physiopathological relevance. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1392, 153–175.

35

36

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Dierbach, J.H. (1828). De neusten Entdeckungen in der Materia Medica. Heidelberg and Leipzig.
Dioscorides, P. and Beck, L.Y. (2011). De Materia Medica. Hildesheim: Olms-Weidmann.
Dirikoc, S., Priola, S.A., Marella, M., Zsurger, N., and Chabry, J. (2007). Nonpsychoactive cannabidiol
prevents prion accumulation and protects neurons against prion toxicity. J Neurosci, 27, 9537–9544.
Donovan, M. (1845). On the physical and medicinal qualities of Indian hemp (Cannabis indica); with
observations on the best mode of administration, and cases illustrative of its powers. Dublin Journal of
Medical Science, 26, 368–402, 459–461.
Donovan, M. (1851). Observations on the resin of Indian hemp. Dublin Medical Press, 25, 182–183.
Douthwaite, A.H. (1947). Choice of drugs in the treatment of duodenal ulcer. British Medical Journal, 2,
43–47.
Dreher, M.C. (1982). Working Men and Ganja: Marihuana Use in Rural Jamaica. Philadelphia, PA: Institute
for the Study of Human Issues.
Dreher, M.C., Nugent, K., and Hudgins, R. (1994). Prenatal marijuana exposure and neonatal outcomes in
Jamaica: an ethnographic study. Pediatrics, 93, 254–260.
Duran, M., Perez, E., Abanades, S., et al. (2010). Preliminary efficacy and safety of an oromucosal standardized cannabis extract in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. British Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 70, 656–663.
Dymock, W., Warden, C.J.H., and Hooper, D. (1890). Pharmacographia Indica. A History of the Principal
Drugs of Vegetable Origin, Met With in British India. London: K. Paul Trench Trübner & Co.
El-Remessy, A.B., Al-Shabrawey, M., Khalifa, Y., et al. (2006). Neuroprotective and blood-retinal barrierpreserving effects of cannabidiol in experimental diabetes. American Journal of Pathology, 168, 235–244.
Ellis, R.J., Toperoff, W., Vaida, F., et al. (2009). Smoked medicinal cannabis for neuropathic pain in HIV: a
randomized, crossover clinical trial. Neuropsychopharmacology, 34, 672–680.
Evans, F.J. (1991). Cannabinoids: the separation of central from peripheral effects on a structural basis.
Planta Medica, 57, S60–S67.
Fankhauser, M. (2002). History of cannabis in Western medicine. In: F. Grotenhermen and E.B. Russo
(eds.). Cannabis and Cannabinoids: Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutic Potential. Binghamton,
NY: Haworth Press.
Farlow, J.W. (1889). On the use of belladonna and Cannabis indica by the rectum in gynecological practice.
Boston Medical and Surgical Journal, 120, 507–509.
Fayrer, J. (1865). A case of traumatic tetanus treated by opium smoking and internal administration of
chloroform and hemp. Edinburgh Medical Journal, 10, 716–720.
Fishbein, M. (1942). Migraine associated with menstruation. Journal of the American Medical Association,
237, 326.
Fisher, J. (1975). Cannabis in Nepal: an overview. In: V. Rubin (ed.). Cannabis and Culture. The Hague:
Mouton Publishers.
Foroughi, M., Hendson, G., Sargent, M.A., and Steinbok, P. (2011). Spontaneous regression of septum
pellucidum/forniceal pilocytic astrocytomas – possible role of Cannabis inhalation. Child’s Nervous
System, 27, 671–679.
Fride, E. (2002a). Cannabinoids and cystic fibrosis:a novel approach. Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics, 2,
59–71.
Fride, E. (2002b). Cannabinoids and feeding: the role of the endogenous cannabinoid system as a trigger for
newborn suckling. Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics, 2, 51–62.
Fride, E. (2004). The endocannabinoid-CB receptor system: importance for development and in pediatric
disease. Neuroendocrinology Letters, 25, 24–30.
Fride, E. and Mechoulam, R. (1993). Pharmacological activity of the cannabinoid receptor agonist, anandamide, a brain constituent. European Journal of Pharmacology, 231, 313–314.
Fronmüller, B. (1860). Cannabis indica as a hypnotic. Journal of Materia Medica, 2, 474.

THE PHARMACOLOGICAL HISTORY OF CANNABIS

Fuchs, L. (1999). The great herbal of Leonhart Fuchs: De historia stirpium commentarii insignes, 1542 (notable commentaries on the history of plants). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Gaillard, P.C. and Desaussure, W. (1853). Two cases of trismus nascentium, which recovered under the
use of Cannabis indica. Charleston Medical Journal and Review, 8, 808–811.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964). Isolation, structure and partial synthesis of an active constituent of
hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86, 1646–1647.
Gerard, J. and Johnson, T. (1975). The Herbal: or, General History of Plants. New York: Dover Publications.
Gertsch, J., Leonti, M., Raduner, S., et al. (2008). Beta-caryophyllene is a dietary cannabinoid. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 9099–104.
Glass, M., Dragunow, M., and Faull, R. L. (1997). Cannabinoid receptors in the human brain: a detailed
anatomical and quantitative autoradiographic study in the fetal, neonatal and adult human brain.
Neuroscience, 77, 299–318.
Gottschling, S. (2011). Cannbinoide bei Kindern. Gute Erfahrungen bei Schmerzen, Spastik und in der
Onkologie. Angewandte Schmerztherapie und Palliativmedizin, 55–57.
Gowers, W.R. (1888). A Manual of Diseases of the Nervous System. Philadelphia, PA: P. Blakiston Son & Co.
Grattan, J.H.G. and Singer, C.J. (1952). Anglo-Saxon Magic and Medicine. Illustrated Specially From the
Semi-Pagan Text “Lacnunga.” London: Oxford University Press.
Grierson, G.A. (1894). The hemp plant in Sanskrit and Hindi literature. Indian Antiquary, 260–262.
Grinspoon, L. and Bakalar, J.B. (1997). Marihuana, the Forbidden Medicine. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Guy, G.W. and Stott, C.G. (2005). The development of Sativex – a natural cannabis-based medicine.
In: R. Mechoulam (ed.). Cannabinoids as Therapeutics. Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag, pp. 231–263.
Guzman, M., Duarte, M.J., Blazquez, C., et al. (2006). A pilot clinical study of Delta(9)tetrahydrocannabinol in patients with recurrent glioblastoma multiforme. British Journal of Cancer, 95,
197–203.
Hampson, A.J., Grimaldi, M., Axelrod, J., and Wink, D. (1998). Cannabidiol and (-)delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol are neuroprotective antioxidants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 95, 8268–8273.
Han, B., Gfroerer, J.C., and Colliver, J.D. (2010). Associations between duration of illicit drug use and
health conditions: results from the 2005–2007 national surveys on drug use and health. Annals of
Epidemiology, 20, 289–297.
Hare, H.A. (1887). Clinical and physiological notes on the action of Cannabis indica. Therapeutic Gazette,
2, 225–228.
Hashibe, M., Morgenstern, H., Cui, Y., et al. (2006). Marijuana use and the risk of lung and upper aerodigestive tract cancers: results of a population-based case-control study. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers
and Prevention, 15, 1829–1834.
Hepler, R.S. and Frank, I.R. (1971). Marihuana smoking and intraocular pressure. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 217, 1392.
Herodotus. (1998). The Histories. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hildegard and Throop, P. (1998). Hildegard von Bingen’s Physica: the Complete English Translation of Her
Classic Work on Health and Healing. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press.
Hill, A.J., Weston, S.E., Jones, N.A., et al. (2010). Delta-Tetrahydrocannabivarin suppresses in vitro epileptiform and in vivo seizure activity in adult rats. Epilepsia, 51, 1522–1532.
Ibn Sina (Avicenna) (1294). Al-Qanun fi l-tibb (Canon of medicine). Bulaq.
Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. (1894). Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, 1893–94. Simla:
Govt. Central Print. Office.
Jeffries, D. and Jeffries, L. (2003). Jeffrey’s Journey: A Determined Mother’s Battle for Medical Marijuana for
Her Son. Rocklin, CA: LP Chronicles.

37

38

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Jiang, H.E., Li, X., Zhao, Y.X., et al. (2006). A new insight into Cannabis sativa (Cannabaceae) utilization
from 2500-year-old Yanghai Tombs, Xinjiang, China. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 108, 414–422.
Johnson, J.R., Burnell-Nugent, M., Lossignol, D., et al. (2010). Multicenter, double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled, parallel-group study of the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of THC:CBD extract and
THC extract in patients with intractable cancer-related pain. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management,
39, 167–179.
Jones, N.A., Hill, A.J., Smith, I., et al. (2010). Cannabidiol displays antiepileptiform and antiseizure properties in vitro and in vivo. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 332, 569–577.
Julien, M.S. (1849). Chirugie chinoise. Substance anesthétique employée en Chine, dans le commencement du III-ième siecle de notre ère, pour paralyser momentanement la sensibilité. Comptes Rendus
Hebdomadaires de l’Académie des Sciences, 28, 223–229.
Kaempfer, E. (1996). Exotic pleasures. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Kahl, O. (1994). Sabur ibn Sahl: Dispensatorium parvum (al-Aqrabadhin al-Saghir). Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Kavia, R., De Ridder, D., Constantinescu, C., Stott, C., and Fowler, C. (2010). Randomized controlled
trial of Sativex to treat detrusor overactivity in multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis, 16, 1349–1359.
Khastagir, A.C. (1878). Hemp (ganja) smoking in tetanus on a new principle. Indian Medical Gazette,
210–211.
Lémery, N. (1727). Dictionaire ou traité universel des drogues simples. Rotterdam: Jean Hofhout.
Leweke, F.M., Piomelli, D., Pahlisch, F., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol enhances anandamide signaling and
alleviates psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. Translational Psychiatry, 2, e94.
Lewis, B., Menage, V.L., Pellat, C.H., and Schacht, J. (1971). The Encyclopedia of Islam. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Lewis, H. (1900). Cannabis indica: A study of its physiologic action, toxic effects and therapeutic indications. Merck’s Archives of Materia Medica and its Uses, 2, 247–251.
Lewis, W. (1794). The Edinburgh New Dispensatory. Edinburgh: Printed for W. Creech.
Ley, W. (1842). On the efficacy of Indian hemp in some convulsive disorders. Provincial Medical and
Surgical Journal, 4, 407–409.
Li, X., Kaminski, N.E., and Fischer, L.J. (2001). Examination of the immunosuppressive effect of
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in streptozotocin-induced autoimmune diabetes. International
Immunopharmacology, 1, 699–712.
Ligresti, A., Moriello, A.S., Starowicz, K., et al. (2006). Antitumor activity of plant cannabinoids with
emphasis on the effect of cannabidiol on human breast carcinoma. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 318, 1375–1387.
Linné, C.A. (1772). Materia medica per regna tria naturae. Lipsiae et Erlangae: Wolfgang Waltherum.
Lorenz, R. (2004). On the application of cannabis in paediatrics and epileptology. Neuroendocrinology
Letters, 25, 40–44.
Lowry, C.A., Lightman, S.L., and Nutt, D.J. (2009). That warm fuzzy feeling: brain serotonergic neurons
and the regulation of emotion. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 23, 392–400.
Lozano, I. (2001). The therapeutic use of Cannabis sativa L. in Arabic medicine. Journal of Cannabis
Therapeutics, 1, 63–70.
Lucas, J.C. (1880). Notes on tetanus; with remarks on the efficacy of Cannabis indica when administered
through the lungs. Medical Times and Gazette, 202–204.
Ludlow, F.H. (1857). The Hasheesh Eater: Being Passages From the Life of a Pythagorean. New York:
Harper.
Macgill, E.R. (ed.) (1990). This Booke of Sovereigne Medicines. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI.
Mackenzie, S. (1887a). Indian hemp in persistent headache. Journal of the American Medical Association,
9, 732.
Mackenzie, S. (1887b). Remarks on the value of Indian hemp in the treatment of a certain type of headache.
British Medical Journal, 1, 97–98.

THE PHARMACOLOGICAL HISTORY OF CANNABIS

Mackenzie, S. (1894). Therapeutique médicale: De la valeur therapeutique speciale du chanvre indien dans
certains états morbides. Semaine Médicale, 14, 399–400.
Malfait, A.M., Gallily, R., Sumariwalla, P.F., et al. (2000). The nonpsychoactive cannabis constituent cannabidiol is an oral anti-arthritic therapeutic in murine collagen-induced arthritis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 97, 9561–9566.
Manniche, L. (1989). An Ancient Egyptian Herbal. Austin, TX: University of Texas.
Marcandier, M. (1758). Traité du chanvre. Paris: Chez Nyon.
Marshall, C.R. (1897). The active principle of Indian hemp: a preliminary communication. Lancet, 1,
235–238.
Matsuda, L.A., Lolait, S.J., Brownstein, M.J., Young, A.C., and Bonner, T.I. (1990). Structure of a cannabinoid receptor and functional expression of the cloned cDNA. Nature, 346, 561–564.
Mattison, J.B. (1891). Cannabis indica as an anodyne and hypnotic. St. Louis Medical and Surgical Journal,
61, 265–271.
McMeens, R.R. (1860). Report of the Ohio State Medical Committee on Cannabis indica. White Sulphur
Springs, OH: Ohio State Medical Society.
Mechoulam, R. and Ben-Shabat, S. (1999). From gan-zi-gun-nu to anandamide and
­2-arachidonoylglycerol: The ongoing story of cannabis. Natural Products Report, 16, 131–143.
Mechoulam, R., Ben-Shabat, S., Hanus, L., et al. (1995). Identification of an endogenous 2-monoglyceride,
present in canine gut, that binds to cannabinoid receptors. Biochemical Pharmacology, 50, 83–90.
Medicinal Genomics. (2012). Medicinal Genomics Sequences the Cannabis Genome to Assemble the Largest
Known Gene Collection of this Therapeutic Plant [Online]. Available at: http://www.medicinalgenomics.
com/medicinal-genomics-sequences-the-cannabis-genome-to-assemble-the-largest-known-genecollection-of-this-therapeutic-plant/.
Merzouki, A. and Molero Mesa, J. (1999). La [sic] chanvre (Cannabis sativa L.) dans la pharmacopée traditionelle du Rif (nord du Maroc). Ars Pharmaceutica, 40, 233–240.
Miller, J. (1845). Case of traumatic tetanus, following injury of the finger; treated by amputation of the
injured part, the application of cold to the spine, and the internal use of the Cannabis indica. Monthly
Journal of Medical Science, 5, 22–30.
Moran, M.M., McAlexander, M.A., Biro, T. and Szallasi, A. (2011). Transient receptor potential channels
as therapeutic targets. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 10, 601–620.
Moreau, J.-J. (1845). Du hachisch et de l’aliénation mentale: Études psychologiques. Paris: Fortin Masson.
Müller-Vahl, K.R., Prevedel, H., Theloe, K., et al. (2003a). Treatment of Tourette syndrome with
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta 9-THC): no influence on neuropsychological performance.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 28, 384–388.
Müller-Vahl, K.R., Schneider, U., Prevedel, H., et al. (2003b). Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is
effective in the treatment of tics in Tourette syndrome: a 6-week randomized trial. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 64, 459–465.
Munro, S., Thomas, K.L., and Abu-Shaar, M. (1993). Molecular characterization of a peripheral receptor
for cannabinoids. Nature, 365, 61–65.
Munson, A.E., Harris, L.S., Friedman, M.A., Dewey, W.L., and Carchman, R.A. (1975). Antineoplastic
activity of cannabinoids. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 55, 597–602.
Needham, J. and Gwei-Djen, L. (1974). Science and Civilisation in China. Chemistry and Chemical
Technology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nees Von Esenbeck, T.F.L. and Ebermaier, K.H. (1830). Handbuch der medicinisch-pharmaceutischen
botanik. Düsseldorf: Arnz and Comp.
New York (N.Y.). Mayor’s Committee on Marihuana, Wallace, G.B., and Cunningham, E.V. (1944). The
Marihuana Problem in the City of New York; Sociological, Medical, Psychological and Pharmacological
Studies. Lancaster, PA: The Jaques Cattell Press.

39

40

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Nicholson, A.N., Turner, C., Stone, B.M., and Robson, P.J. (2004). Effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
and cannabidiol on nocturnal sleep and early-morning behavior in young adults. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 24, 305–313.
Notcutt, W., Price, M., Miller, R., et al. (2004). Initial experiences with medicinal extracts of cannabis for
chronic pain: results from 34 “N of 1” studies. Anaesthesia, 59, 440–452.
Novotna, A., Mares, J., Ratcliffe, S., et al. (2011). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallelgroup, enriched-design study of nabiximols* (Sativex ), as add-on therapy, in subjects with refractory
spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis. European Journal of Neurology, 18, 1122–1131.
Noyes, R., Jr., Brunk, S.F., Avery, D.A.H., and Canter, A.C. (1975). The analgesic properties of delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol and codeine. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 18, 84–89.
Nurmikko, T.J., Serpell, M.G., Hoggart, B., et al. (2007). Sativex successfully treats neuropathic pain characterised by allodynia: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Pain, 133, 210–220.
O’Shaughnessy, R. (1842). Case of tetanus, cured by a preparation of hemp (the Cannabis indica.).
Transactions of the Medical & Physical Society of Calcutta, 8, 462–469.
O’Shaughnessy, W.B. (1838–1840). On the preparations of the Indian hemp, or gunjah (Cannabis indica);
their effects on the animal system in health, and their utility in the treatment of tetanus and other convulsive diseases. Transactions of the Medical and Physical Society of Bengal, 71–102, 421–461.
Osler, W. and Mccrae, T. (1915). The Principles and Practice of Medicine. New York: Appleton and
Company.
Parker, L.A., Mechoulam, R., and Schlievert, C. (2002). Cannabidiol, a non-psychoactive component of
cannabis and its synthetic dimethylheptyl homolog suppress nausea in an experimental model with rats.
Neuroreport, 13, 567–70.
Parkinson, J., Bonham, T., and L’Obel, M.D. (1640). Theatrum Botanicum: The Theater of Plants. London:
Tho. Cotes.
Pereira, P. (1843). The Elements of Materia Medica and Therapeutics. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Blanchard.
Petro, D.J. and Ellenberger, C. (1981). Treatment of human spasticity with delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol.
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 413S–416S.
Pliny. (1951). Pliny: Natural History. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
Pliny. (1980). Natural History, Books XXIV–XXVII. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Polli, G. (1870). Further Observations On Haschish In Medicine. St. Andrew’s Medical Graduates
Association Transactions, 3, 98–101.
Pollington, S. (2000). Leechcraft: Early English Charms, Plant Lore, and Healing. Hockwold-cum-Wilton:
Anglo-Saxon Books.
Potter, D.J. (2009). The Propagation, Characterisation and Optimisation of Cannabis sativa L. as a
Phytopharmaceutical. PhD thesis, King’s College London.
Rabelais, F. (1990). Gargantua and Pantagruel. New York: Norton.
Raby, W.N., Modica, P.A., Wolintz, R.J., and Murtaugh, K. (2006). Dronabinol reduces signs and
symptoms of idiopathic intracranial hypertension: a case report. Journal of Ocular Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, 22, 68–75.
Radtke, C., Sinis, N., Sauter, M., et al. (2011). TRPV channel expression in human skin and possible role in
thermally induced cell death. Journal of Burn Care and Research, 32, 150–159.
Rajesh, M., Mukhopadhyay, P., Batkai, S., et al. (2010). Cannabidiol attenuates cardiac dysfunction, oxidative stress, fibrosis, and inflammatory and cell death signaling pathways in diabetic cardiomyopathy.
Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 56, 2115–2125.
Reymond, E.A.E. (1976). From the contents of the Libraries of the Suchos Temple in the Fayyum, Part
I, a medical book from Crocodilopolis. Papyrus Vindobonensis D. 6257. Vienna: Österreichische
Nationalbibliothek.
Reynolds, J.R. (1890). Therapeutical uses and toxic effects of Cannabis indica. Lancet, 1, 637–638.

®

THE PHARMACOLOGICAL HISTORY OF CANNABIS

Ringer, S. (1886). A Handbook of Therapeutics. New York: W. Wood.
Roemer, B. (1873). On tetanus and tetanoid affections, with cases. St. Louis Medical & Surgical Journalq, 10,
363–378.
Rog, D.J., Nurmiko, T., Friede, T., and Young, C. (2005). Randomized controlled trial of cannabis based
medicine in central neuropathic pain due to multiple sclerosis. Neurology, 65, 812–819.
Rowland, L.P. (ed.). (2000). Merritt’s Neurology. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins.
Rudenko, S.I. (1970). Frozen Tombs of Siberia; The Pazyryk Burials of Iron Age Horsemen. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Rumpf, G.E. and Beekman, E.M. (1981). The Poison Tree: Selected Writings of Rumphius on the Natural
History of the Indies. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
Russo, E. (1998). Cannabis for migraine treatment: the once and future prescription? An historical and scientific review. Pain, 76, 3–8.
Russo, E. (2002). Cannabis treatments in obstetrics and gynecology: a historical review. Journal of Cannabis
Therapeutics, 2, 5–35.
Russo, E.B. (2001a). Handbook of Psychotropic Herbs: A Scientific Analysis of Herbal Remedies for Psychiatric
Conditions. Binghamton, NY: Haworth Press.
Russo, E.B. (2001b). Hemp for headache: an in-depth historical and scientific review of cannabis in
migraine treatment. Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics, 1, 21–92.
Russo, E.B. (2003). Future of cannabis and cannabinoids in therapeutics. Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics,
3, 163–174.
Russo, E.B. (2004a). History of cannabis as medicine. In: G.W. Guy, B.A. Whittle, and P. Robson (eds.).
Medicinal Uses of Cannabis and Cannabinoids. London: Pharmaceutical Press.
Russo, E.B. (2004b). Clinical endocannabinoid deficiency (CECD): Can this concept explain therapeutic
benefits of cannabis in migraine, fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome and other treatment-resistant
conditions? Neuroendocrinology Letters, 25, 31–39.
Russo, E.B. (2005). Cannabis in India: ancient lore and modern medicine. In: R. Mechoulam (ed.).
Cannabinoids as Therapeutics. Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag.
Russo, E.B. (2007). History of cannabis and its preparations in saga, science and sobriquet. Chemistry &
Biodiversity, 4, 2624–2648.
Russo, E.B., Burnett, A., Hall, B., and Parker, K.K. (2005). Agonistic properties of cannabidiol at 5-HT-1a
receptors. Neurochemical Research, 30, 1037–1043.
Russo, E.B., Jiang, H.E., Li, X., et al. (2008). Phytochemical and genetic analyses of ancient cannabis from
Central Asia. Journal of Experimental Botany, 59, 4171–4182.
Russo, E.B., Merzouki, A., Molero Mesa, J., Frey, K.A., and Bach, P.J. (2004). Cannabis improves night
vision: a pilot study of dark adaptometry and scotopic sensitivity in kif smokers of the Rif Mountains of
Northern Morocco. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 93, 99–104.
Sallan, S.E., Zinberg, N.E. and Frei, E.D. (1975). Antiemetic effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in
patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. New England Journal of Medicine, 293, 795–797.
Salmon, W. (1710). Botanologia. The English herbal: or, History of Plants. London: I. Dawkes.
Sanchez, C., Galve-Roperh, I., Canova, C., Brachet, P., and Guzman, M. (1998). Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol induces apoptosis in C6 glioma cells. FEBS Letters, 436, 6–10.
Sarianidi, V. (1998). Margiana and Protozoroastrism. Athens: Kapon Editions.
Sée, M.G. (1890). Usages du Cannabis indica dans le traitement des névroses et dyspepsies gastriques.
Bulletin de l’Academie Nationale de Medecine, 3, 158–193.
Sethi, S. (1868). Syntagma de alimentorum facultatibus. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner.
Shaw, J. (1843). On the use of the Cannabis indica (or Indian hemp)-1st-in tetanus-2nd-in hydrophobia3rd-in cholera-with remarks on its effects. Madras Quarterly Medical Journal, 5, 74–80.
Shoemaker, J.V. (1899). The therapeutic value of Cannabis indica. Texas Medical News, 8, 477–488.

41

42

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Short, T. (1751). Medicina Britannica: Or a Treatise on Such Physical Plants. Philadelphia, PA: Re-printed,
and sold by B. Franklin and D. Hall.
Shou-Zhong, Y. (1997). The Divine Farmer’s Materia Medica: A Translation of the Shen Nong Ben Cao Jing.
Boulder, CO: Blue Poppy Press.
Skues, E.W. (1858). Tetanus treated with extract of Indian hemp: recovery. Edinburgh Medical Journal, 3,
877–878.
Strange, W. (1883). Cannabis indica: as a medicine and as a poison. British Medical Journal, 14.
Stuart, G. (1928). Chinese Materia Medica. Shanghai: Presbyterian Mission.
Sugiura, T., Kondo, S., Sukagawa, A., et al. (1995). 2-Arachidonoylglycerol: a possible endogenous cannabinoid receptor ligand in brain. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 215, 89–97.
Svendsen, K.B., Jensen, T.S., and Bach, F.W. (2004). Does the cannabinoid dronabinol reduce central
pain in multiple sclerosis? Randomised double blind placebo controlled crossover trial. British Medical
Journal, 329, 253.
Sylvestre, D.L., Clements, B.J., and Malibu, Y. (2006). Cannabis use improves retention and virological
outcomes in patients treated for hepatitis C. European Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 18,
1057–1063.
Thomas, A., Baillie, G.L., Phillips, A.M., et al. (2007). Cannabidiol displays unexpectedly high potency as
an antagonist of CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists in vitro. British Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 613–623.
Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A., Wease, K.N., et al. (2005). Evidence that the plant cannabinoid delta-9tetrahydrocannabivarin is a cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 antagonist. British Journal of Pharmacology, 146,
917–926.
Thompson, R.C. (trans.). (1903). The Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia. London: Luzac and Co.
Thompson, R.C. (1924). The Assyrian Herbal. London: Luzac and Co.
Thompson, R.C. (1949). A Dictionary of Assyrian Botany. London: British Academy.
Torres, S., Lorente, M., Rodriguez-Fornes, F., et al. (2011). A combined preclinical therapy of cannabinoids and temozolomide against glioma. Molecular Cancer Therapy, 10, 90–103.
Tyrell, H.J. (1867). On the treatment of delirium tremens by Indian hemp. Medical Press and Circular, 17,
243–244.
United States. Dept. Of the Army. Office of the Surgeon General, Barnes, J.K., Woodward, J.J., and
Otis, G.A. (1990). The Medical and Surgical History of the Civil War. Wilmington, NC: Broadfoot
Publishing Co.
Van Bakel, H., Stout, J.M., Cote, A.G., et al. (2011). The draft genome and transcriptome of Cannabis
sativa. Genome Biology, 12, R102.
Viggiano, D., Ruocco, L.A., Pignatelli, M., Grammatikopoulos, G., and Sadile, A. G. (2003). Prenatal elevation of endocannabinoids corrects the unbalance between dopamine systems and reduces activity in
the Naples High Excitability rats. Neuroscience and Biobehavior Reviews, 27, 129–139.
Volicer, L., Stelly, M., Morris, J., McLaughlin, J., and Volicer, B. J. (1997). Effects of dronabinol on anorexia and disturbed behavior in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. International Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 12, 913–919.
Vriend, H.J.D. (1984). The Old English Herbarium and, Medicina de quadrupedibus. London: Published for
the Early English Text Society by the Oxford University Press.
Wade, D.T., Robson, P., House, H., Makela, P., and Aram, J. (2003). A preliminary controlled study
to determine whether whole-plant cannabis extracts can improve intractable neurogenic symptoms.
Clinical Rehabilitation, 17, 18–26.
Ware, M.A., Wang, T., Shapiro, S., et al. (2010). Smoked cannabis for chronic neuropathic pain: a randomized controlled trial. CMAJ, 182, E694–701.
Waring, E.J. (1897). Remarks on the Uses of Some of the Bazaar Medicines and Common Medical Plants of
India. London: J. & A. Churchill.

THE PHARMACOLOGICAL HISTORY OF CANNABIS

Weil, A.T., Zinberg, N.E., and Nelsen, J.M. (1968). Clinical and psychological effects of marihuana in man.
Science, 162, 1234–1242.
Weiss, L., Zeira, M., Reich, S., et al. (2006). Cannabidiol lowers incidence of diabetes in non-obese diabetic
mice. Autoimmunity, 39, 143–151.
West, M.E. (1991). Cannabis and night vision. Nature, 351, 703–704.
Westphall, R., Janssen, P., Lucas, P., and Capler, R. (2006). Survey of medicinal cannabis use among childbearing women: patterns of its use in pregnancy and retroactive self-assessment of tis efficacy against
‘morning sickness’. Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice, 12, 27–33.
Williams, S.J., Hartley, J.P., and Graham, J.D. (1976). Bronchodilator effect of delta1-tetrahydrocannabinol
administered by aerosol of asthmatic patients. Thorax, 31, 720–723.
Wilsey, B., Marcotte, T., Tsodikov, A., et al. (2008). A randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover trial of
cannabis cigarettes in neuropathic pain. Journal of Pain, 9, 506–521.
Wright, T.L. (1862). Correspondence. Cincinnati Lancet and Observer, 5, 246–247.
Wright, T.L. (1863). Some therapeutic effects of Cannabis indica. Cincinnati Lancet and Observer, 6, 73–75.
Zajicek, J., Fox, P., Sanders, H., et al. (2003). Cannabinoids for treatment of spasticity and other symptoms
related to multiple sclerosis (CAMS study): multicentre randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet,
362, 1517–1526.
Zheng, Y., Baek, J.H., Smith, P.F., and Darlington, C.L. (2007). Cannabinoid receptor down-regulation in
the ventral cochlear nucleus in a salicylate model of tinnitus. Hear Res, 228, 105–111.
Zias, J. (1995). Cannabis sativa (Hashish) as an effective medication in antiquity: the anthropological evidence. In: S. Campbell and A. Green (eds.). The Archaeology of Death in the Ancient Near East. Oxford:
Oxbow Books, pp. 232–234.
Zias, J., Stark, H., Sellgman, J., et al. (1993). Early medical use of cannabis. Nature, 363, 215.
Zotter, H. (1996). Medicina antiqua: Codex Vindobonensis 93 der Österreichischen Nationalbibliothek:
Kommentar. Graz: Akademische Druck- u. Verlagsanstalt.
Zuardi, A.W., Cosme, R.A., Graeff, F.G., and Guimaraes, F.S. (1993). Effects of ipsapirone and cannabidiol on human experimental anxiety. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 7, 82–88.
Zuardi, A.W., Morais, S.L., Guimaraes, F.S., and Mechoulam, R. (1995). Antipsychotic effect of cannabidiol [letter]. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 56, 485–486.
Zuardi, A.W., Shirakawa, I., Finkelfarb, E., and Karniol, I. G. (1982). Action of cannabidiol on the anxiety
and other effects produced by delta 9-THC in normal subjects. Psychopharmacology, 76, 245–250.

43

Chapter 3

International Control of Cannabis
Alice P. Mead

3.1 Introduction
Over the centuries, many cultures have utilized preparations derived from the opium poppy
(Papaver somniferum), cannabis plant (Cannabis sativa), and coca bush (Erythroxylum coca).
These psychoactive substances were widely used in religious rituals, as indications of social status, as medications, and as intoxicants. Indeed, the lines between such uses were often blurred,
particularly the line between medical and ‘quasi-medical’ (i.e., not prescribed by Western-trained
physicians, such as home remedies, folk cures) use. For example, in India even into the twentieth
century, the general population had little access to medical care provided by physicians, indigenous and traditional medical systems flourished, and home remedies and tonics were common.
Treatment with herbal products was well accepted, and an organized, robust medical “profession”
did not exist (I.C. Chopra and Chopra 1957; R.N. Chopra and Chopra 1955; UNODC 1953).
As Westernized technology, science, and medicine progressed and became dominant, these
lines became better defined for opium, coca, and their manufactured derivatives. However, greater
technological advances were needed to investigate and develop the properties/potential of the cannabis plant (Crowther et al. 2010). As a result, cannabis and its preparations occupied an uncertain
status, enjoying a brief period of interest in Western medicine, but not gaining a wide and lasting
acceptance as a valuable tool in the medical armamentarium. Only recently has science evolved
to the point where modern cannabis-derived medications have been properly characterized and
developed and their value recognized by the medical profession. Nevertheless, the criteria remain
elusive for determining how, and whether, lines should be drawn between their various uses.

3.2 The role of Britain in early attitudes about cannabis

and cannabis medicines
Britain has played an important role over time in several aspects of the cannabis issue. During
the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the East India Company and later the colonial government in India were confronted with the fact that both cannabis preparations and opium were
widely employed for a variety of purposes: medical, “quasi/alternative,” and nonmedical (Booth
2004; I.C. Chopra and Chopra 1957; Mills 2003).
At home in Britain, hemp was well known as an important and useful plant. Its fiber was manufactured into sails, cordage, and a variety of other textile and naval products which were essential
to a maritime and imperial power. Until the studies of William B. O’Shaughnessy were published
in the 1830s and 1840s (O’Shaughnessy 1839), physicians had much less knowledge of, or interest in, the use of tetrahydrocannabinol-containing strains of cannabis either as intoxicants or as
medicines. However, in subsequent decades, cannabis preparations began to be utilized extensively as medications both in Europe and North America (Mills 2003).

INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS

3.2.1 Britain and the Indian cannabis and opium commissions

During this time, the British Parliament was under assault by anti-opium forces, and cannabis
was swept into the campaign. In response, Parliament required the colonial Government of India
to establish two commissions: a Royal Commission on opium to investigate whether the opium
trade could be abolished and the economic impact of doing so, as well as the extent of consumption in India; and a commission to investigate the “ganja question”: the Indian Hemp Drugs
Commission (IHDC). Meeting almost concurrently in 1893–1894, these commissions enabled
Parliament to divert attention away from the real question, i.e., the British India Government’s
supplying of vast quantities of opium to China in violation of Chinese law (Mills 2003).
The IHDC concluded that moderate use of cannabis drugs had no appreciable physical effects
on the body, no harmful effect on the brain (except possibly for individuals predisposed to act
abnormally), and no adverse influence on morality (Abel 1980; Booth 2004). Rather than attempt
to prohibit production and use, the IHDC stated that the government should do nothing to promote moderate use or encourage smuggling, or force individuals to use more hazardous substances, and should actively discourage excessive use. In short, it recommended a system of taxation,
control, and restriction (Mills 2003).
The Royal Opium Commission reached parallel conclusions. It determined that the use of
smoking opium was rare in India; most use was oral, and misuse was a “negligible feature” in
Indian life. Opium was taken for various disorders and as a general stimulant in those of “failing strength.” It found “strong evidence” indicating moderation on the part of the consumer and
“general immunity from any evident ill effects,” even from habitual use. The Commission opined
that it would be impractical to limit opium consumption to strictly medical purposes and that
“alternative” medical and nonmedical uses were so entwined with medical uses that no distinct
line could be drawn between the two (R.N. Chopra and Chopra 1955).
After the two commissions had issued their reports, cannabis faded from attention in Parliament.

3.3 The impact of nineteenth-century scientific developments
European medical journals paid little heed to the IHDC report (Mills 2003) but, as a result of
several factors, the popularity of cannabis as a medicine peaked at the end of the nineteenth
century and then gradually declined (Crowther et al. 2010). Various major developments were
changing the way that Westerners viewed medical treatment, and therefore, “legitimate” scientific
and medical products, purposes, and uses. This perspective was of pivotal importance during the
development of international drug control measures and, therefore, in the control of the cannabis
plant.
3.3.1 Technology and single molecules

Improved technology facilitated the study of pharmacology and organic chemistry and the isolation of active ingredients from natural products, as well as the synthesis of pure molecules
(Anderson 2005). In 1805, morphine was identified and isolated by Freidrich Serturner, and soon
thereafter, the development of the hypodermic needle permitted rapid production of its analgesic
effect (Musto 1987). Later in the century, aspirin provided another source of pain relief. Other
synthetic medicines, such as barbiturates and chloral hydrate, and certain vaccines, etc., were
developed. A pharmaceutical industry appeared to manufacture and commercialize many of
these products. Increasingly, complex, unrefined herbal medicines were eclipsed by manufactured
medications containing only one isolated or synthetic primary active ingredient.

45

46

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Cannabis proved to be a significant challenge for the current technology. Despite the efforts of
researchers in Britain and across Europe to identify and isolate the active intoxicating ingredient of
cannabis, it remained elusive (Crowther et al. 2010; Mechoulam 1973; Walton 1938). Preparations
were unstandardized and unstable, and patient response was variable (Abel 1980; I.C. Chopra
and Chopra 1957). In light of the proliferation of other more reliable options available to them,
practicing physicians gradually lost interest in prescribing such preparations (Adams 1942/1973).
Modern medicine gradually left cannabis behind, in both Europe and North America. Hence,
when cannabis was swept into the controversy over drug control in the international arena, the
medical profession did not rise up vigorously and consistently in its defense.
3.3.2 The ascendancy of professional pharmaceutical influence

The gradual ascendency of pharmacy and other organized health professions in Europe and, later,
North America further narrowed the concept of “medical use.” The growth of these professions
was an important factor in the implementation of domestic control over opium/opium preparations and cannabis. For example, the newly formed Pharmaceutical Society in Britain had a
professional incentive to support legislation such as the Pharmacy Act of 1868. The Act gave registered pharmacists the responsibility for the identification and regulation/distribution of poisons
and other dangerous drugs, including opium and cannabis (Anderson 2005). This authority gave
them a competitive advantage over unregistered druggists, grocers, and others who tried to sell
these substances to the public (Musto 1987). In Germany, the Pharmacy Ordinance of 1872 limited the sale of cannabis by pharmacies (Ballotta et al. 2008). Thus, the principle that psychoactive
drugs should be used only for medical purposes (as defined by Western medicine) was gaining
acceptance in European nations and would eventually become a foundational principle of international drug control conventions.

3.4 The development of international control mechanisms
In the first decades of the twentieth century, interest was growing in international cooperation on
matters of mutual concern, and opium was one of the primary targets of attention.
3.4.1 The years 1900–1925

An international conference in Shanghai (1909), followed by a convention in The Hague (1912),
resulted in early attempts to control international trade in opium. During the deliberations, the
US sought to convince the colonial powers to adopt a narrow definition of “legitimate use” of
opium, which would preclude any use not defined as medical or scientific according to Western
standards. The colonial powers, however, advocated for a broader approach. These concepts
would come to play an important role in the future control of cannabis (Abel 1980; Mills 2003;
Sinha 2001).
The demands of World War I eclipsed international interest in drug control issues. However,
following the end of hostilities, concerns over opium and manufactured drugs re-emerged. Two
conferences were held in Geneva in 1924 and 1925. During the Second Opium Conference, cannabis was not on the agenda, but the Egyptian delegate objected that hashish was “at least as harmful as opium” and should be included in the same category as the other narcotics under discussion
(Booth 2004; Bruun et al. 1975). He contended that hashish was the “principal cause of most of
the cases of insanity occurring in Egypt” (Mills 2003; Sinha 2001). As a result, provisions requiring the imposition of import/export controls over trade in cannabis and the prevention of illicit

INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS

traffic in cannabis and resin were incorporated into the treaty. Subsequently, cannabis extracts or
tinctures were also brought within its purview (Bruun et al. 1975; UNODC 1962). For the first
time, then, cannabis and cannabis preparations came under international control.
3.4.2 The years 1926–1961

Drugs continued to be smuggled through nonsignatory countries, and over the next 35+ years,
two more treaties (1931 and 1936 Geneva Conventions) and several protocols were promulgated.
The need for a single, consolidated treaty instrument became evident. Cannabis was a matter of
increasing attention and concern. The World Health Organization (WHO) in 1954 reported that
cannabis and cannabis preparations had become obsolete and were little used by the medical
profession (Wayne 1968, Append. 2). Furthermore, most nations had gradually come to endorse
the principle that the consumption of opium (and, by analogy, other psychoactive plants) should
be restricted exclusively to medical and scientific needs (UNODC 1953). Even in non-Western
countries, such as India, the use of cannabis preparations in modern medical practice declined
and, by the late 1950s, they were “hardly used” (I.C. Chopra and Chopra 1957). Consequently, the
future of cannabis as a medicine appeared bleak.
3.4.3 The 1961 United Nations (UN) Single Convention

on Narcotic Drugs

The 1961 UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs maintained the requirements of prior conventions relating to licensing, reporting of national estimates of drug requirements and statistical
returns, and establishing limits on production and manufacture, etc. Moreover, it extended control systems to the plants cultivated to provide the raw materials for narcotic drugs.
The Convention’s Preamble established two, competing foundational principles: (1) drug abuse
is a scourge and parties must limit exclusively to medical and scientific purposes the production,
manufacture, export/import, distribution, trade, use, and possession of drugs; and (2) the use of
psychoactive substances for medical and scientific purposes is indispensable and their availability
for such purposes should not be unduly restricted.
Psychoactive substances, i.e., “drugs,” were placed in one of four schedules. These controlled
substance schedules were distinct from those established under the national laws of most Western
countries, e.g., the US and the UK. The Single Convention’s Schedule I was not the most restrictive
of its Schedules; rather it set forth the restrictions and requirements that applied to many drugs.
The most restrictive level of control was imposed by Schedule IV, which contained drugs
viewed as being particularly dangerous with regard to their abuse liability and as having extremely
limited therapeutic value. All drugs listed in Schedule IV were also listed in Schedule I. Hence, it
was this joint placement in Schedules IV and I that imposed the greatest degree of control under
the Convention. With regard to Schedule IV drugs, under Article 2, paragraph 5, a Party was
required to (1) adopt any special measures of control that in its opinion were necessary, taking into
account the particularly dangerous properties of the drug; and (2) if in its opinion the prevailing
conditions in its country rendered it the most appropriate means of protecting the public health
and welfare, prohibit the production, manufacture, export and import of, trade in, possession or
use of any such drugs except for amounts which may be necessary to medical and scientific research
only. Therefore, parties were empowered, but not necessarily required, completely to prohibit
Schedule IV substances. Subsequently, many countries chose to enact prohibitory legislation.
The Single Convention explicitly brought within its control the cannabis plant, resin, extracts,
and tinctures. Cannabis and cannabis resin were placed in Schedules IV and I (Table 3.1).

47

48

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Table 3.1 Scheduling of cannabis and cannabinoids under UK, US, and international treaty law
Material

Single
Psychotropic
Convention Convention

UK Misuse of
UK Misuse of
Drugs Regulations Drugs Act

US Controlled
Substances Act

Cannabis/resin

Schedule I
and IV

–

Schedule I

Schedule 2,
Part II, Class B

Schedule I

Cannabis extracts/
tincture

Schedule I

–

Schedule I

Schedule 2,
Part II, Class B

Schedule I

MHRA-approved
extracts

Schedule I

–

Schedule 4.1

Schedule 2,
Part II, Class B

Schedule I

Pure THC

–

Schedule I

Schedule 2

Schedule 2,
Part II, Class B

Schedule I

Dronabinol/Δ9-THC

–

Schedule II

Schedule 2

Schedule 2,
Part II, Class B

Schedule III

Pure CBD

–

Not scheduled Not scheduled

Not scheduled Schedule I

Other non-THC pure –
cannabinoids

Not scheduled Not scheduled

Not scheduled Schedule I

However, cannabis extracts and tinctures were listed only in Schedule I; therefore, they were not
governed by the more restrictive provisions of Schedule IV. Nevertheless, cannabis extracts and
tinctures could only be used for “medical and scientific purposes.” Since these substances had
been abandoned by the medical profession, this criterion, at the time, appeared effectively to prohibit their use.
Under Articles 23, 26, and 28, countries that permitted cultivation (or importation) of the
opium poppy, cannabis plant, or coca bush were required to establish a national monopoly that
would take possession of and distribute the crops. Furthermore, if the “prevailing conditions” in
the country were to render the prohibition of such cultivation the “most suitable measure, in its
opinion, for protecting the public health and welfare and preventing diversion,” Article 22, paragraph 1 obligated the party to prohibit cultivation.
Parties to the Single Convention were required (or empowered) to enact domestic legislation
to enforce its requirements. Article 36, paragraph1(a) mandated each signatory, subject to its
constitutional limitations, to establish measures to ensure that activities (including cultivation,
production, manufacture, extraction, preparation, possession, offering, offering for sale, distribution, purchase, sale, transport, importation, and exportation) contrary to the treaty would be
punishable offences, and that serious offences would be liable to adequate punishment particularly by imprisonment or other penalties of deprivation of liberty. Following a 1972 amendment,
the Single Convention, Article 36, paragraph 2(b), permitted parties to provide to drug abusers, as
an alternative/in addition to conviction or punishment, treatment, or other nonpunitive options.
3.4.4 The 1971 UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances

The Single Convention did not encompass newer synthetic psychotropic substances, and use of
these drugs was on the increase, thereby necessitating a new system of international control. The
1971 UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances was modelled after the Single Convention. The
Psychotropic Convention also classified substances into four schedules, but the structure differed
from the Single Convention. Schedule I was the most restrictive and Schedule IV the most lenient.

INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS

With regard to Schedule I substances, Article 7 required parties, among other things, to prohibit all use except for scientific and very limited medical purposes by duly authorized persons, in
medical or scientific facilities that are directly under the control of, or specifically approved (and
closely supervised) by, the government.
Tetrahydrocannabinol and its isomers were originally classified in Schedule I. In 1991, dronabinol (also known as delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol) was moved to Schedule II (ECDD 2006). Other
synthetic or otherwise pure cannabinoids, such as cannabidiol (CBD), were not controlled under
the Psychotropic Convention (Table 3.1). Accordingly, many countries do not control such pure
cannabinoids under their national laws, but other nations, such as the US, have chosen to do so.
Like the Single Convention, the 1971 Convention required a party, subject to its constitutional
limitations, to enact legislation classifying an action contrary to the treaty as a punishable offence
and ensuring that serious offences must be liable to adequate punishment, particularly by imprisonment or other deprivation of liberty. Nevertheless, Article 22, paragraph 1(b) offered a savings
clause, allowing parties to provide treatment, education, aftercare, rehabilitation and social reintegration either as an alternative to conviction or punishment, or in addition to punishment, when
dealing with an individual drug abuser.
3.4.5 1988 UN Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs

and Psychotropic Substances

As international drug trafficking escalated, it became apparent that additional control mechanisms were necessary. The 1988 UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances addressed a number of new matters, including money laundering, asset
seizure, agreements on mutual legal assistance (in investigations, prosecutions and judicial proceedings), and the diversion of precursor chemicals.
The enforcement provisions of the 1988 Convention have been the source of considerable
commentary and controversy. With regard to offences and sanctions, Article 3, paragraph 1, of
the 1988 Convention required a party, among other things, to make the cultivation of the opium
poppy, coca bush or cannabis plant, in violation of the 1961 Convention, a criminal offence. This
requirement is not explicitly subject to a country’s constitutional principles and the basic concepts
of its legal system (but would be subject implicitly to many of the exceptions and qualifications of
the 1961 treaty, such as the requirement that legitimate research be allowed). However, pursuant
to paragraph 4(c), in appropriate cases of a minor nature in paragraph 1, the parties were permitted to provide, as alternatives to conviction or punishment, such options as education, rehabilitation, or social reintegration, as well as, when the offender is a drug abuser, treatment and aftercare.
In nonminor offences, such alternatives could only be provided in addition to punishment.
Under Article 3, paragraph 2, possession of drugs for personal consumption was also to be
made a criminal offence under national law, but the qualifying language does limit this obligation.
Furthermore, under paragraph 4(d), a party may provide alternative options, either in addition to,
or as an alternative to, conviction or punishment.
Accordingly, as one author has noted, “The 1988 Convention clearly offers alternative ways of
dealing with persons possessing, purchasing or cultivating small amounts of drug for [their] own
consumption” (Krajeski 2000, p. 335).

3.5 How absolute are the treaty obligations?
Out of respect for the autonomy of countries’ domestic laws, all of the treaties contain qualifying (“loophole”) language that can mitigate certain of their legal obligations. Under the Single

49

50

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Convention, for example, a party must prohibit the production and use of Schedule IV substances
(such as cannabis) if in its opinion the prevailing conditions render prohibition the most appropriate means of protecting the public health and welfare. Of course, such a qualifier is not completely
open-ended. The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969 obliges parties to interpret
treaties in good faith and to respect the object and purpose of all Conventions (Ballotta et al. 2008;
Bewley-Taylor 2003).
Other obligations, particularly those relating to the duty to enact criminal and other penalties
for certain acts, are often qualified by the following language: “Subject to its constitutional principles and the basic concepts of its legal system” (Bewley-Taylor and Jelsma 2012). This provision
has come into play in a number of cases. For example, Canadian courts have ruled that, under the
Canadian Charter, individuals with a bona fide need to use cannabis for medical purposes cannot
be penalized or denied access to the substance (Regina v Parker 2000). The Constitutional Court
of Colombia in 1994 invalidated a law criminalizing possession of cannabis for personal consumption (Krajeski 2000). A number of nations, particularly in Latin America, have been actively considering whether such qualifying language would permit them to revise their drug control laws.
This qualification is also relevant in a country with a federal structure, in which states or provinces have a significant degree of legislative and judicial autonomy, such as the US and Australia.
In the US, federal law is the supreme law of the land. State laws that actively impede or conflict with federal law are invalid under Article VI, clause 2 (the Supremacy Clause) of the US
Constitution (Emerald Steel Fabricators, Inc. v Bureau of Labor and Industries 2010). On the other
hand, states are free to repeal their own laws, and, in addition, cannot criminalize conduct that is
found to be protected by state courts under the state constitution, as is the case in Alaska (Ravin
v State 1975). Furthermore, in the US, the courts have ruled that federal government cannot
“commandeer” states to enact laws or otherwise take action to implement federal law (New York
v United States 1992; Printz v United States 1997). The International Narcotics Control Board
(INCB) has taken note of this complex problem (INCB 2012). However, it is uncertain how a
nation should deal with such a situation, other than attempting to exert its influence over the
states/provinces (perhaps through the exercise of other powers, such as the power to withhold
federal funding for state programs) and/or utilizing its own resources to enforce national law (if
there is a national law on the subject).
Finally, the concept of “expediency” or prosecutorial discretion may be considered to be one
of the basic principles of a country’s legal system. As a result of limited resources or other considerations, a country (or state/province or local subdivision therein) may de-prioritize certain
types of prosecutions, either by formal guidance or on a case-by-case basis. The Dutch relied in
part on the expediency principle in issuing national prosecutorial guidelines that, under certain
circumstances, permit the retail sale of cannabis in “coffee houses.” Nevertheless, this approach
also must be applied with circumspection, and perhaps only to minor offences, since it could be
employed to avoid any or perhaps all international obligations, thereby undermining the entire
treaty system. “It would be enough to introduce certain provisions and at the same time to forget
about them” (Krajeski 2000, p. 336).

3.6 How have nations interpreted and implemented

their obligations?
Over the past two or more decades, many countries have, either by law or in practice, lessened
the penalties that attach to certain cannabis-related conduct (MacCoun and Reuter 2001). For
the most part, this greater leniency has been applied to possession of cannabis for personal

INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS

consumption, although the scope of “personal use” may also be variously defined with regard to,
e.g., quantities of, and locations where, cannabis that may be possessed, and whether cultivation
of small amounts is allowed (EMCDDA 2012f). In many countries, it is increasingly unlikely
that first-time cannabis offenders will face jail time for possession. However, significant criminal
sanctions generally still apply to supply-type activities, such as larger-scale cultivation, possession
of significant amounts with intent to sell, etc. (EMCDDA 2012e). These legal reforms have been
instituted either de jure (in written law) or de facto (in practice). There is considerable discussion
among scholars over the appropriate analytical framework for classifying such changes.
3.6.1 Depenalization

This concept has been described as legal changes that reduce the severity of penalties, whether
criminal or civil (Pacula et al. 2004). Under many of these schemes, possession remains a criminal
offence, but in most cases, offenders are cautioned or diverted to alternative resources, including
education, treatment, etc. Depending on the jurisdiction, diversion can occur at various stages
of the criminal prosecution. Offenders will still therefore often incur a criminal record of arrest
or conviction (Room et al. 2010). Indeed, in many US states that reduced or eliminated criminal
penalties for cannabis possession, arrests for such conduct actually rose (Pacula et al. 2004).
In some countries, the law states that the penalty for a certain activity, e.g., possessing a controlled drug, will depend on the type or classification of the drug in question. Cannabis may
specifically be placed in a category or schedule that does not incur the most severe penalties.
For example, cannabis is classified in Class B of the UK Misuse of Drugs Act, a class that incurs
intermediate penalties (Table 3.1). In the Netherlands, cannabis products are listed in Schedule
II of the Opium Act, whereas “hard” drugs are in Schedule I. In the US, sanctions under federal
law generally depend on the schedule of the substance, although some specific penalties apply to
cannabis.
In other countries, the law (at least as written) applies the same punishment for an activity, no
matter which substance is involved. However, there often is a discrepancy between the formal
legal texts and actual (de facto) practice. Courts do consider the nature of the substance, quantity
and any aggravating or other factors when sentencing, either using their discretionary power or
by applying a guideline, directive, or judicial precedent (EMCDDA 2012b).
In a federalized system, states or provinces may reduce criminal penalties under local law, even
if a substance is restrictively scheduled at the national level. In the US over the past 40 years, a
number of states have passed legislation reducing the status of the criminal offence of personal
possession of cannabis from a felony to a misdemeanor, although cannabis remains in Schedule
I of the federal Controlled Substances Act (MacCoun and Reuter 2001; Pacula et al. 2004; Room
et al. 2010) (Table 3.1).
In some cases, the scheduling system determining criminal penalties may be different from the
one governing the availability of drugs for medical use. In the UK, cannabis is a Class B substance
under Schedule 2, Part II, of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (the intermediate classification), but
it is a Schedule 1 substance under the Misuse of Drugs Regulations 2001 (the most restrictive
schedule), which determine access to a substance for research or for medical prescription or supply (Table 3.1).
3.6.2 Decriminalization

This widely used term may perhaps most accurately be applied to changes which retain the illegal
status of cannabis possession/use, but which transform it from a criminal to a noncriminal or civil

51

52

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

offence, making it a subcategory of depenalization (Pacula et al. 2004; Room et al. 2010). A noncriminal punishment may involve a fine, a citation, diversion to counselling or treatment, or some
other administrative sanction, such as loss of a driver’s license. This change in character or status
may only apply to certain minor offences. An example of this is Portugal, which in 2001 removed
from the criminal law all personal possession, use, and acquisition of drugs. Possession is still illegal, and offenders are channeled to “Commissions for the Dissuasion of Drug Addictions,” which
offer treatment, but can also impose other penalties. Personal possession amounts are defined
(EMCDDA 2011; Room et al. 2010). Some Australian jurisdictions also employ this model, under
which only civil penalties attach to minor possession cases and, in some jurisdictions, small-scale
cultivation (Room et al. 2010). In some countries, such as Luxembourg, consumption of cannabis
is not a criminal offence, unless it occurs in front of/with minors, in the workplace, or in schools
(EMCDDA 2012). However, in most jurisdictions, possession/ cultivation of larger quantities and
distribution/sale are still criminal offences (Commission of the European Communities 2009;
EMCDDA 2012e).
Civil penalty schemes are not without problems. Because of the ease with which police may issue
notices, a type of “net widening” may result, with a greater number of people being cited. Since a
large percentage of individuals fail to pay their fines when due, the effect can be to “increase the
numbers at risk of criminal sanction for nonpayment of fines, an outcome that can particularly
disadvantage those with limited financial means” (Room et al. 2010, p. 115). Abuses of the system
may also occur, such as criminal gangs aggregating small cultivation plots to avoid incurring the
criminal penalties that would attach to cultivation for supply (Room et al. 2010).
Legal commentary is mixed on the extent to which various decriminalization or depenalization schemes comport with the Conventions. In general, scholars believe that depenalization or
decriminalization of possession for personal consumption, particularly of cannabis, is permissible
under the treaties, although depenalization, which retains the criminal character of an act, may be
more defensible (Krajeski 2000).
3.6.3 Legalization

Various descriptions have also been applied to the concept of “legalization.” In general, legalization denotes that an activity is not illegal and therefore incurs no sanctions, criminal or civil.
The scope of legalization could be narrow or broad and could take place by means of legislation
or judicial ruling. For example, individual possession and cultivation of small amounts of cannabis for personal use could be legalized in certain locations, such as small amounts in the home
(Ravin v State 1975). Possession in other circumstances or involving large amounts, or larger scale
cultivation and distribution might still be unlawful. Farther along the continuum, a system of
commercial cultivation and manufacturing, wholesale distribution and retail sales could be permitted, with attendant taxation, licensure, and governmental regulation and oversight, including
limits on advertising. At the farthest end of the continuum, cannabis could be produced, sold, and
consumed like coffee, although even here there would likely be regulations pertaining to quality,
safety, and content of the products and, no doubt, limits on distribution to minors.
At this moment, Uruguay is the only country in the world permitting full commercialization
of a cannabis trade, from “seed to shelf ” (Room et al. 2010, Serrano et al. 2014). Uruguay permits individuals to obtain cannabis in one (only) of three ways: purchase up to 40 grams/month
from registered pharmacies; cultivate up to 6 plants at home, with an annual maximum of 480
grams; or join a cannabis club, which can cultivate up to 99 plants per group with the same annual cap per member. The law took effect on May 6, 2014. Legal scholars generally agree that such
a system falls afoul of the Single Convention, because it would authorize the use of cannabis for

INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS

nonmedical purposes (Bewley-Taylor 2003). Nevertheless, in the face of pressing international
and domestic economic pressures, and escalating violence resulting from the drug trade in Mexico
and elsewhere, discussion of legalization has become more visible and widespread (Kilmer et al.
2010).
In a few countries, such as Spain, certain regions have permitted “cannabis social clubs” to
flourish. Such noncommercial organizations cultivate and sell limited amounts of cannabis, only
enough for the personal needs of their members, who pay membership fees proportionate to their
consumption. Members may be subject to certain restrictions, such as agreeing not to distribute
the cannabis to others (Room et al. 2010). Some supporters of this model believe that it is preferable to outright legalization (Alonso 2011).
In November, 2012, two voter initiatives in the US (Colorado and Washington) were passed,
each having two aspects: (1) removal of all penalties for possession by adults of one ounce or less
of cannabis for personal use (and in Colorado, cultivation of six plants), and (2) legalization of
commercial cultivation, production, distribution, and sale of cannabis to adults. These events garnered tremendous international publicity and interest. On August 29, 2013, the US Department of
Justice issued a guidance memorandum to federal prosecutors, indicating that they should not at
present take enforcement action against cannabis-related activities that are authorized under state
law and that do not adversely impact eight specified areas of federal priority. The sheer volume
of sales or the for-profit status of an operation will not alone be triggers for federal prosecution.
States, however, must implement strong and effective regulatory and enforcement systems to
mitigate against threats to federal enforcement interests (DOJ 2013). It remains to be seen how
the rest of the world will respond to this development and to the new Uruguayan program. In
2016, the UN General Assembly will review current policies and strategies to confront the global
drug problem.
3.6.3.1 The unique case of the Netherlands

The Netherlands offers a unique blend of approaches. Beginning in 1976, the country reduced
penalties for cannabis possession for personal use and ultimately allowed retail outlets called “coffee shops” to sell small quantities of cannabis. Formal national guidelines govern the scheme. The
guidelines do not authorize cultivation and supply, creating what has been called the “backdoor
problem” (Room et al. 2010, p. 95). This system has been described as “prohibition with an expediency principle” or “de facto legalisation,” because of the retail element (MacCoun and Reuter
2001, p. 246).

3.7 Is it possible to distinguish between medical

and nonmedical use?
Both the Single Convention and the 1971 Psychotropic Convention obligate a country to take
steps to ensure that cannabis and other psychoactive substances are manufactured, distributed,
used, etc., exclusively for medical and scientific purposes. Therefore, with regard to cannabis, a
nation must devise regulatory or other tools to distinguish medical from nonmedical and, perhaps, “alternative” medical applications. At one end of the continuum, it could be determined (as
Dennis Peron, a prominent US cannabis advocate, famously claimed) that “all use [of cannabis]
is medical” (Rendon 2012). At the other end, medical use could be limited solely to a product
that is prescribed by a physician and dispensed by a pharmacy, and that has achieved marketing

53

54

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

authorization from the national regulatory authority. As with their criminal and/or civil sanctioning schemes, governments have taken different approaches to this question.
3.7.1 Classification or scheduling as a tool

Under many domestic regulatory laws, a particular scheduling is often necessary, but not sufficient, for medical access. In most cases, the national pharmaceutical regulatory process, which
governs the registration of new medications, also must be completed in order for a rescheduled/
classified product containing a controlled drug to be prescribed and dispensed. In the UK, dronabinol (Marinol®) is in Schedule 2 of the Misuse of Drugs Regulations, but no dronabinol-­containing
product has been approved for marketing (although individual physicians may prescribe it on a
“named patient” basis). In the US, opium and coca leaves are Schedule II substances, but all products containing, or derived from, those drugs have (or would need to secure) marketing approval
from the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they could be prescribed to patients.
If a country wishes to maintain an even stricter distinction between nonmedical and medical
use of cannabis, it may place a registered cannabis-derived prescription medication into a different
classification or schedule from unrefined herbal material (and other unapproved preparations)
under its national controlled drugs legislation. This would be particularly appropriate for medications derived from cannabis extracts or tinctures, since these preparations are already less restrictively scheduled than herbal cannabis under the Single Convention. In Australia, the government
rescheduled a specifically-described cannabis-derived medication (Sativex®) from Schedule 9
(prohibited drugs) to Schedule 8 (controlled but not prohibited), while cannabis remained in
Schedule 9. Germany amended its narcotic law in May 2011 to permit the “use of cannabis preparations authorized in finished medicines.” This change did not apply to herbal cannabis. The US
took this approach in 1985, when the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) rescheduled a
specific FDA-approved formulation of dronabinol (Marinol®) and placed it in Schedule II (and
later III) of the US Controlled Substances Act (Table 3.1). All other tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
products remained in Schedule I. Such differential scheduling is not uncommon, and it is not
limited to THC or cannabis. In the US, the illicit version of gamma hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) is
a Schedule I substance. However, when formulated in an FDA-approved pharmaceutical product,
it is classified in Schedule III (Neuman 2004).
3.7.2 Can “alternative” medical use be permitted?

The 1961 and 1971 Conventions appear to contemplate a fairly narrow concept of medical purpose and use. Accordingly, one could argue that a country’s accepted medicinal product regulatory processes must be applied to cannabis and cannabis preparations; that is, no special exceptions
should be afforded cannabis, without some convincing justification for the differential treatment.
3.7.2.1 Cannabis as an herb or dietary supplement?

Some cannabis advocates contend that cannabis is “a harmless herb,” but such a claim may not
accord with conventional regulatory criteria. First, potent psychoactive substances are generally
not included within the class of herbs and dietary supplements. Second, in the US, UK, and the
European Union overall, an item becomes a medical product or “drug” subject to rigorous regulation, in part if it is intended to be used in the treatment, diagnosis, prevention, or mitigation of
a disease or condition (MHRA 2012a, 2012b). Thus, if the manufacturer or retailer makes medical claims for the item, those claims may transform the item into a medical product (FDA 2011,
2012). Ojai berries, vitamin C, and wheatgrass juice could, in theory, “become” medical products.

INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS

Such products may only be marketed after extensive preclinical studies and properly controlled
clinical trials have developed robust proof of quality, safety, and efficacy. A quick survey of the
Internet demonstrates that cannabis manufacturers and distributor-dispensaries often disseminate medical claims and patient testimonials, which would normally move their cannabis preparations into the category of products that must be registered as conventional medicines.
Many believe that the current regulatory schemes governing herbal products do not adequately
protect consumers (Cohen 2005). For example, herbal practitioners may not be licensed or regulated (MHRA 2012). In the US, under the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act, herbs
are subject to a much lower degree of regulatory scrutiny. In many cases, manufacturers fail to
adhere even to these lesser quality control standards and other requirements. As a result, contaminated, mislabeled, or otherwise inferior products can be placed on the market (FDA 2011; OIG
2012; Schneeman et al. 2005). There is a serious concern whether this regulatory path should be
extended to cannabis-containing medicinal products.
3.7.2.2 Cannabis via compassionate access?

Another option might be a type of compassionate access scheme, monitored by physicians.
However, if such a program does not require proper physician supervision, documentation, data
collection, etc., the line between medical and alternative medical or nonmedical use may still be
difficult to maintain. Several countries have implemented such programs. In some cases, this
approach is viewed as only a temporary measure necessary to relieve suffering until properly
characterized and standardized products can secure marketing registrations. The US Institute of
Medicine (IOM) issued a report recommending, among other things, the short-term (less than
6 months) use of smoked cannabis for patients with debilitating symptoms under certain limited
conditions (Joy et al. 1999). In the UK, the House of Lords Select Committee recommended that
herbal cannabis be placed in Schedule 2 of the Misuse of Drugs Regulations so physicians could
prescribe it on a named patient basis (House of Lords 1998). The UK government rejected that
recommendation but several years later permitted a cannabis-derived pharmaceutical product
(approved in Canada but not in the UK) to be made available to hundreds of patients by their
physicians. The US briefly maintained a “Compassionate Access Investigational New Drug program,” which provided cannabis to certain individual patients with various conditions who were
monitored by their physicians (but this was closed to new patients in 1992) (Randall and O’Leary
1998).
In other cases, such programs are of much broader scope and duration, effectively constituting
a completely separate system, which operates outside of standard regulatory processes. For example, in 2000, the Netherlands established the Office of Medicinal Cannabis (OMC). OMC licensed
two cultivators to grow cannabis under controlled conditions (only one cultivator, Bedrocan®,
is currently licensed), and in 2003, legislation was enacted to allow physicians to prescribe, and
pharmacies to supply, such herbal cannabis to patients. The intention was ultimately to develop
and register cannabis-based prescription medications. However, progress toward the development of a licensed medication has been slow. Furthermore, the program has been undermined
because patients are free to purchase cannabis through “coffee shops” (Hazekamp 2006). Israel
also has established a program to provide herbal cannabis to selected patients.
The INCB has criticized these alternative systems for accessing cannabis. It has opined that
a country should not make or permit such extensive exceptions to its customary regulatory
requirements, since the quality, safety, and efficacy of the materials and their dosage forms
have not been properly determined (INCB 2003). Perhaps ironically, in the countries described
earlier that maintain “alternative” medical access systems, a cannabis-derived pharmaceutical

55

56

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

product is still required to pass through the standard, rigorous regulatory process in order to be
registered as a prescription medication. This can be said to create a type of regulatory “cognitive
dissonance.”
Again, it can be argued that any compassionate access scheme should comport with other,
similar programs already in place under national law. In Europe, several types of compassionate
access are recognized. First, individual patients may access a medication on the initiative and
responsibility of their treating physicians (who request the products directly from the manufacturer) on a “named-patient basis.” Second, a government may permit access to a cohort of
seriously ill patients, who have no conventional treatment options and cannot enroll in a clinical
trial. Typically, the product is either the subject of a marketing application or is undergoing clinical trials (EMA 2007). Finally, patients who have previously participated in a clinical trial may be
allowed to enter an expanded access or open-label extension study, which permits them to continue to use the investigational product. All of these access programs are limited in scope, involve
products that have been manufactured to prescription quality and standards, and contrast sharply
with the cannabis access programs described previously.
3.7.2.3 Maintaining the integrity of alternative cannabis access schemes

The challenges of maintaining the integrity of such alternative access systems can be significant.
These challenges have become evident in the US, where 18 states and the District of Columbia
have allowed the use of herbal cannabis for medical purposes with the “recommendation” of a
physician or other type of healthcare provider (a Schedule I substance cannot be prescribed in the
US). In the early days of these laws, physicians, fearful of possible federal law enforcement activity
and lacking knowledge about the quality and composition of cannabis products, were reluctant
to recommend these materials to their patients. In addition, the first laws permitted only patients
and their actual caregivers to cultivate cannabis; dispensaries were rare. Subsequently, however,
many physicians discovered that there was an economic opportunity in issuing recommendations, and a cottage industry developed (Lopez 2009; Rendon 2012). In addition, dispensaries
opened, either because they were directly authorized under state law or because state law was
interpreted to be ambiguous. As a result, the numbers of patients exploded, many having a selfdiagnosis (Caplan 2012).
Other countries may face related challenges. Canada, as a result of a series of court rulings,
has established a government-sponsored program to cultivate and provide cannabis for medical
use. A national agency, the Office of Marihuana Medical Access, regulates the production and
distribution of herbal cannabis; qualifying patients, with their physician’s approval, may seek
permission to grow their own, designate a surrogate cultivator, or obtain the government’s cannabis through the Marihuana Medical Access Regulations (MMAR) (Health Canada 2001). Many
individuals contend that the Health Canada system is cumbersome and that the government’s
cannabis is of lesser quality than that offered by such dispensaries (Lucas 2008). In addition to
the government-regulated system, a parallel system of dispensaries or “compassion centers” exists
outside the law. So long as such nonofficial sources of access flourish, it is difficult for a national
government to ensure that cannabis is being used strictly for legitimate medical (or even “alternative” medical) purposes in accordance with the Single Convention.
Removing the government from the system altogether may not resolve the problem. Canada
is now considering changes to the MMAR, which would effectively remove Health Canada’s role
in: (1) determining who may access cannabis and (2) providing a source of material. Individuals
would submit a document from a physician, specifying the individual’s authorized daily quantity,
to one of a number of licensed cultivators. There would no longer be any limits on qualifying

INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS

medical conditions (Health Canada 2012). Since little evidence supports the medical use of
smoked or otherwise inhaled herbal cannabis in other than a few medical conditions, it is unlikely
that this system would comport with the country’s other alternative access systems, such as its
Special Access Programme (Health Canada 2002, 2008).

3.8 What factors will affect future access?
Controversy over the medical, “alternative” medical, and/or nonmedical use of cannabis and cannabinoids continues to grow in intensity. Competing concerns and developments will affect the
future accessibility of cannabis for any, or all, purposes.
3.8.1 The impact of the Internet

The Internet will continue to play a significant role. Previously, information gathering and distribution were difficult. Newspapers and television were the primary vehicles for broad public
communication, and even those would reach a limited and often local audience. By contrast, the
Internet has allowed information and advocacy to be disseminated instantly to an international
audience. This has facilitated increased membership in, and fundraising by, advocacy groups,
enabling them to organize effectively and expand their influence amongst, not only the public, but
also government representatives and other policymakers and opinion leaders. Particularly in the
US, their greater sophistication has allowed them to utilize a panoply of state and local vehicles
for legal and social change that have a cumulative impact over time: organizing state and local
initiative processes, pressuring local jurisdictions to de-prioritize cannabis law enforcement, etc.
Internet communication has also allowed a “community” of individuals to develop. Chat rooms
and list-serves enable the participants to share ideas, opinions, experiences (both positive and
negative), and even drug “recipes.” Individuals who might otherwise feel isolated instead experience support and obtain encouragement for their activities, ideas, and opinions. Improved coordination and increased influence may result in more liberalized cannabis policies.
3.8.2 Growing international influence of non-governmental

organizations (NGOs)

The influence of drug reform NGOs and drug policy institutes/entities has expanded, and they
have a consistent and conspicuous presence at the annual meetings of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs. Many of these groups, such as the Transnational Institute and the International
Drug Policy Consortium, publish legal and policy analyses favorable to drug policy reform, testify
during open sessions, and issue position papers and recommendations that garner considerable
media attention. For example, in 2011, the Global Commission on Drug Policy (GCDP) issued
a report entitled War on Drugs in which the members made a number of recommendations for
changes to the international system of drug control (GCDP 2011). GCDP was convened in July
2010 and has been working to establish a road map for change in drug laws and policies around
the world (GCDP 2012).
3.8.3 Increasing variety and sophistication of cannabis products

The proliferation of cannabis dispensaries, clubs, or other distribution sources, has spawned a
cannabis industry, complete with a wide range of products. These products offer alternatives to
smoking, such as vaporizers and e-cigarettes. This technology has made it possible to partake of
cannabis inhalation in various environments that would not permit smoking. For those who do

57

58

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

not wish conspicuously to consume cannabis in the presence of their children or in public spaces,
a variety of “infused” products, such as beverages and edibles, are available. Some companies
claim to have products (albeit often of variable composition and quality) that are high in CBD and
low in THC, which purport to provide therapeutic relief without intoxication. This wider product
choice may expand the numbers of cannabis consumers.
3.8.4 Improved technology permitting the development of complex

cannabis-derived prescription medications

In the face of improved technological tools, national regulatory agencies, such as the UK Medicines
and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) and the US FDA, have demanded increasingly sophisticated levels of manufacturing quality control, batch-to-batch consistency, extensive
characterization, and pharmacological and other types of preclinical product testing to ensure
the quality and safety (and, of course, efficacy) of prescription medications. These standards were
developed primarily for new chemical entities (NCEs), for which the path to registration has
become prolonged, arduous, and expensive, and pose a potentially formidable set of obstacles to
products derived from complex botanical materials (Crowther et al. 2010). Nevertheless, recognition appears to be growing that such products, including those derived from cannabis, may be
able to meet modern regulatory standards. Guidance from the US FDA sets forth the pathway for
developing a botanical product into a prescription medicine (FDA 2004).
Furthermore, disillusionment with the “single molecule/single target” approach of the past
30 years may increase receptivity to the multifold activity of complex botanical extracts. The
importance of micronutrients is well accepted in nutrition and agriculture. Modern medicine
appears to be moving in the direction of multimodal cocktails of medications, such as the recent
Gilead “4-in-1” AIDS treatment product (Stribild®); however, with NCEs, this approach is hugely
difficult and expensive. The development of complex extracts (properly standardized and qualitycontrolled) may offer this synergy at a lower cost (Russo 2011).
3.8.5 Impact of legalization or decriminalization on “medical

marijuana”

As indicated previously (section 3.6.3), it is too soon to tell if the legalization initiatives in the US
states of Colorado and Washington will sweep the country and the world. If commercial production and supply of cannabis do become more commonplace, there may very well be an impact on
programs that currently permit the sale and use of herbal cannabis for medical purposes. In the
US, it is hard to imagine that individuals will seek and pay for a cannabis recommendation from
a physician, who may not provide anything in the way of care (e.g., treatment plan, diagnostic
tests, follow-up supervision, etc.). There may be little incentive for cannabis advocates to continue to expend time and resources to pass state “medical marijuana” initiatives or to convince
state and federal legislatures to enact such legislation. Similarly, such groups, other than the few
that are solely devoted to medical access, would have little reason to provide extensive information on the Internet, describing the results of new cannabinoid studies on medical uses. Since
physicians would no longer be the gatekeepers to an individual’s legal access to cannabis, they
would no longer be under pressure to consider herbal cannabis as a treatment option, particularly
since unregistered cannabis products cannot in most countries be prescribed and reimbursed by
national health insurance. Unless consumer demand for CBD products were significant, the current publicity surrounding the development of high-CBD strains and products may take a back
seat to promotion and further diversification of high-THC preparations. As one manufacturer of

INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS

cannabis products opined, “Medical will be phased out; instead of 100,000 patients, we will have
1,000,000 customers” (Keber 2012).
On the other hand, if legalization or decriminalization provisions are limited in scope, e.g.,
permitting only the possession and exchange of small amounts of cannabis without remuneration,
there will continue to be incentives to maintain and expand the number of jurisdictions that allow
production and supply for medical use (Kampia 2012).
3.8.6 Growing interest in “alternative” medical products and services

Despite the potential pitfalls of loosely regulated dietary supplements, public interest in vitamins,
minerals, and herbal medicines continues to grow. Even in countries with nationalized healthcare,
cost pressures have often made it difficult for patients to access certain types of medical interventions in a timely way. In the US, patients spend a hasty few minutes with their physicians, with
whom they are unlikely to have had a longstanding relationship; pharmaceutical companies are
portrayed by the media as mercenary giants, willing to seduce physicians with gifts, to conceal
negative safety information about their products, and to engage in inappropriate product promotion (Angell 2005). Product recalls have frightened patients who believed that their national
regulatory systems were adequate to protect them against dangerous side effects or contaminated
products (EMA 2008; GAO 2009). A return to home-grown remedies or sources outside “the system” has considerable public appeal. Such public pressure may increasingly revive the historical
concept of “alternative” (or “quasi”) medical use, and allow cannabis preparations increasingly to
slip past conventional regulatory regimes.
On the other hand, the price of these “remedies” may deter users. Various sources indicate that
the average individual using cannabis for medicinal purposes consumes 2.2 g per day. At many
dispensaries, the average cost of herbal cannabis is about $13 per g. Therefore, the average (30-day)
monthly cost is $858. Vernacular CBD preparations are also costly, especially considering that many
patients use several hundred grams of CBD per day. For example, a daily dose of 300–800 mg of CBD
(doses used in some clinical trials) may cost $2520–6720 per 30-day month (Dixie Botanicals 2013),
which is not covered by health insurance since the product is not FDA approved. Furthermore, the
quality and potency of such products may be uncertain and often unreliable.
3.8.7 Additional factors

Numerous other factors may also significantly impact the scope of permissible cannabis use. In
the US and a number of other countries, antismoking provisions increasingly limit the locations
in which smoking can occur, such as multiunit dwellings, beaches and parks, university campuses,
etc. (Allday 2012; HUD 2011). It is likely that such provisions would apply to smoking cannabis
(particularly if mixed with tobacco, as occurs in many parts of the world). Concern about the
dangers of “drugged driving” and workplace safety are also on the rise around the world, and
expanded drug testing technology may significantly affect when a person may smoke or ingest
cannabis without imperiling his/her employment or driving privileges (ELDD 2003; EMCDDA
2012c; EMCDDA 2012d). Fears about the link of cannabis use with harm to mental health and
cognitive capacity may result in more restrictive policies. By contrast, the growing prominence of
civil libertarianism as a political movement may support greater liberalization.

3.9 Conclusion
Cannabis has accurately been described as a “curious boundary substance, capable of shifting between the categories of licit medicine and illicit drug, and back again, depending on the

59

60

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

different scientific, cultural or political understandings of the day” (Crowther et al. 2010. p. 4).
Today, as in India in the nineteenth century, the lines between medical, “alternative” medical, and
nonmedical use are indistinct, particularly in the US, creating significant challenges for rational
and evidence-based regulation. What does the future hold? It is likely that a variety of cannabisderived prescription medications may enter the conventional medical armamentarium. Cannabis
legalization for recreational purposes may become widespread around the US and ultimately the
rest of the world. In either case, it is possible, but not certain, that these lines will become more
clearly demarcated.

References
Abel, E.L. (1980). Marihuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years. New York: Plenum Press, pp. 126–131.
ACMD (Advisory Committee on the Misuse of Drugs), Hallucinogens Subcommittee (Wayne, E.
Chairman). (1968). Report on Cannabis. London: Home Office.
Adams, R. (1973). Marihuana. In: T.H. Mikuriya (ed.). Marihuana: Medical Papers 1839–1972. Oakland,
CA: Medi-Comp Press, pp. 345–374. (Work originally published in 1942.)
Allday, E. (2012). UC system banning smoking from all campuses. San Francisco Chronicle, January 13.
Alonso, M.B. (2011). Cannabis Social Clubs in Spain. Series on Legislative Reform of Drug Policies Nr.
9. Transnational Institute. Available at: http://www.tni.org/sites/www.tni.org/files/download/dlr9.pdf
(accessed November 20, 2013).
Anderson, S. (ed.). (2005). Making Medicines. London: Pharmaceutical Press.
Angell, M. (2005). The Truth About Drug Companies: How They Deceive Us and What to Do About It. New
York: Random House.
Ballotta, D., Bergeron H., and Hughes, B. (2008). Cannabis control in Europe. In: S. Rödner Sznitman,
B. Olsson, and R. Room (eds.). A Cannabis Reader: Global Issues and Local Experiences. Lisbon:
EMCDDA, pp. 97–117.
Bewley-Taylor, D. and Jelsma, M. (2012). The Limits of Latitude. Series on Legislative Reform of Drug
Policies Nr. 18. Transnational Institute. Available at: http://www.tni.org/sites/www.tni.org/files/
download/dlr18.pdf (accessed September 19, 2012).
Bewley-Taylor, D.R. (2003). Challenging the UN drug control convention: problems and possibilities.
International Journal of Drug Policy, 14, 171–179.
Booth, M. (2004). Cannabis: A History. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Bruun, K., Pan, L., and Rexed, I. (1975). The Gentlemen’s Club: International Control of Drugs and Alcohol.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Caplan, G. (2012). Medical marijuana: a study of unintended consequences. In: Symposium: the road to
legitimizing marijuana: what benefit at what cost? McGeorge Law Review 43, 127–146.
Chopra, I.C. and Chopra, R.N. (1957). The use of the cannabis drugs in India. Bulletin on Narcotics.
Available at: http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-analysis/bulletin/bulletin_1957-01-01_1_
page003.html (accessed September 9, 2012).
Chopra, R.N. and Chopra, I.C. (1955). Quasi-medical use of opium in India and its effects. Bulletin on
Narcotics. Available at: http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-analysis/bulletin/bulletin_
1955-01-01_3_page002.html (accessed September 9, 2012).
Cohen, P.J. (2005). Science, politics, and the regulation of dietary supplements: it’s time to repeal DSHEA.
American Journal of Law and Medicine, 31, 175–214.
Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs (Gerald Le Dain, Chairman). (1972). Interim
Report. Ottawa: Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs.
Commission of the European Communities (EC). (2009). Report from the Commission on the implementation of Framework Decision 2004/757/JHA laying down minimum provisions on the constituent elements
of criminal acts and penalties in the field of illicit drug trafficking. SEC (2009) 1661. Brussels. Available

INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS

at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2009:0669:FIN:EN:PDF (accessed
September 16, 2012).
Crowther, S.M., Reynolds L.A., and Tansey, E.M. (eds.). (2010). The Medicalization of Cannabis. Wellcome
Witnesses to Twentieth Century Medicine. Vol. 40. London: Wellcome Trust Centre for the History of
Medicine at UCL.
Dixie Botanicals. (2013). Dixie Botanicals Hemp Oil Supplement Capsules. [Online] Available at: http://
dixiebotanicals.com/products/hemp-oil-capsules/ (accessed January 13, 2013).
DOJ (Department of Justice). (2013). Memorandum for all United States Attorneys. Available at: http://
www.justice.gov/iso/opa/resources/3052013829132756857467.pdf (accessed August 30, 2013).
ECDD (World Health Organization Expert Committee on Drug Dependence). (2003). Thirty-Third
Report. Geneva: WHO.
ECDD. (2006a). Critical Report: Assessment of Dronabinol and its Stereoisomers. Geneva: WHO. Available
at: http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/quality_safety/4.2DronabinolCritReview.pdf (accessed
September 13, 2012).
ECDD. (2006b). Thirty-Fourth Report. Geneva: WHO.
Emerald Steel Fabricators, Inc. v Bureau of Labor and Industries, 348 Or. 157, (2010).
ELDD (European Legal Database on Drugs). (2003). Drugs and Driving. Available at: http://www.emcdda.
europa.eu/attachements.cfm/att_5737_EN_Drugs_and_driving.pdf (accessed September 15, 2012).
EMCDDA (European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction) (2011). Drug Policy Profiles:
Portugal. Lisbon: EMCDDA. Available at: http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/drug-policyprofiles/portugal (accessed September 15, 2012).
EMCDDA. (2012a). Country Legal Profiles: Luxembourg. Lisbon: EMCDDA. http://www.emcdda.europa.
eu/html.cfm/index5174EN.html# (accessed September 13, 2012).
EMCDDA. (2012b). Legal Topic Overviews: Classification of Controlled Drugs. Available at: http://www.
emcdda.europa.eu/html.cfm/index146601EN.html (accessed September 13, 2012).
EMCDDA. (2012c). Legal Topic Overviews: Legal Approaches to Drugs and Driving. Available at: http://
www.emcdda.europa.eu/html.cfm/index19034EN.html (accessed September 14, 2012).
EMCDDA. (2012d). Legal Topic Overviews: Legal Status of Drug Testing in the Workplace. Available at:
http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/html.cfm/index16901EN.html (accessed September 14, 2012).
EMCDDA. (2012e). Legal Topic Overviews: Penalties for Illegal Drug Trafficking. Available at: http://www.
emcdda.europa.eu/html.cfm/index146646EN.html (accessed September 15, 2012).
EMCDDA. (2012f). Legal Topic Overviews: Possession of Cannabis for Personal Use. Lisbon: EMCDDA.
Available at: http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/legal-topic-overviews/cannabis-possession-for-personaluse#countries (accessed September 15, 2012).
EMA (European Medicines Agency), Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP).
(2007). Guideline on Compassionate Use of Medicinal Products Pursuant to Article 83 of Regulation (EC)
No 726/2004. Lisbon: EMA. Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/
Regulatory_and_procedural_guideline/2009/10/WC500004075.pdf (accessed September 14, 2012).
EMA. (2008). Press Release. The European Medicines Agency recommends suspension of the marketing
authorization of Accomplia. Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/
Press_release/2009/11/WC500014774.pdf (accessed September 13, 2012).
European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. (2001). Directive 2001/83/EC: Community
Code relating to Medicinal Products for Human Use. Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/
LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32001L0083:EN:NOT (accessed September 14, 2012).
FDA (Food and Drug Administration). (2004). Guidance for Industry: Botanical Drug Products. Available
at: http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm (accessed September 19, 2012).
FDA. (2011a). Recall: Firm Press Release. Globe All Wellness, LLC Issues a Voluntary Recall of Dietary
Supplement Found to Contain an Undeclared Drug Ingredient. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Safety/
Recalls/ucm256649.htm (accessed September 10, 2012).

61

62

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

FDA. (2011b). Warning Letter: Ancient Formulas. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/ICECI/
EnforcementActions/WarningLetters/2011/ucm244190.htm (accessed September 10, 2012).
FDA. (2012). News Release: FDA Issues Warning Letters to Dietary Supplement Firms in Colorado and Texas
for Promoting Unapproved Products as Drugs. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/
PressAnnouncements/ucm318445.htm (accessed September 10, 2012).
GAO (Government Accountability Office). (2009). Drug Safety: FDA Has Begun Efforts to Enhance
Postmarket Safety, but Additional Actions Are Needed. Report to the Ranking Member, Committee on
Finance, U.S. Senate. Washington, DC: GAO. Available at: http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d1068.pdf
(accessed September 10, 2012).
GCDP (Global Commission on Drug Policy). (2011). War on Drugs. Available at: http://www.
globalcommissionondrugs.org/wp-content/themes/gcdp_v1/pdf/Global_Commission_Report_English.
pdf (accessed September 16, 2012).
GCDP. (2012). Global Commission on Drug Policy Meets in Poland and Takes the Debate to the East.
Available at: http://www.globalcommissionondrugs.org/global-commission-on-drug-policy-meets-inpoland-and-takes-the-debate-to-the-east/ (accessed September 16, 2012).
Hazekamp, A. (2006). An evaluation of the quality of medicinal grade cannabis in the Netherlands.
Cannabinoids 1(1), 1–9.
Health Canada. (2001). Marihuana Medical Access Regulations. Available at: http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/
eng/regulations/SOR-2001-227/index.html (accessed November 15, 2012).
Health Canada. (2002). Special Access Programme—Drugs. Available at: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/
acces/drugs-drogues/sapfs_pasfd_2002-eng.php (accessed November 15, 2012).
Health Canada. (2008). Guidance Document for Industry and Practitioners. Available at: http://www.hc-sc.
gc.ca/dhp-mps/acces/drugs-drogues/sapg3_pasg3-eng.php (accessed November 15, 2012).
Health Canada. (2012a). Brief History of Drug Regulation in Canada. Available at: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/
dhp-mps/homologation-licensing/info-renseign/hist-eng.php (accessed November 4, 2012).
Health Canada. (2012b). Marihuana for Medical Purposes Regulations (Proposed). Available at: http://
gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p1/2012/2012-12-15/html/reg4-eng.html (accessed November 15, 2012).
House of Lords (House of Lords Select Committee on Science and Technology). (1998). Cannabis: The
Scientific and Medical Evidence. The House of Lords Session 1997–8, 9th report. London: Stationery
Office.
HUD (Department of Housing and Urban Development). (2011). Medical Use of Marijuana and
Reasonable Accommodation in Federal Public and Assisted Housing (Memorandum). Washington, DC:
HUD. Available at: http://www.scribd.com/doc/47657807/HUD-policy-Memo-on-Medical-Marijuanain-Public-Housing
INCB (International Narcotics Control Board). (2003). Report of the International Narcotics Control Board
for 2002. New York: United Nations.
INCB. (2008). Report of the International Narcotics Control Board for 2007. New York: United Nations.
INCB. (2012). Report of the International Narcotics Control Board for 2011. New York: United Nations.
Joy, J.E., Watson S.J., and Benson J.A. (eds.). (1999). Marijuana and Medicine: Assessing the Science Base.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press, Institute of Medicine.
Kampia, R. (2012). Election 2012: How National, State Results Affect Your MMJ Business. Denver: National
Marijuana Business Conference 2012.
Keber, T. (2012). Infused Product Makers: How to Flourish in 2013. Denver: National Marijuana Business
Conference 2012.
Kilmer, B., Caulkins, J.P., Pacula, R.L., et al. (2010). Altered State? Assessing How Marijuana Legalization
in California Could Influence Marijuana Consumption and Public Budgets. Santa Monica, CA: RAND
Corporation.
Krajeski, K. (2000). How flexible are the United Nations drug conventions? International Journal of Drug
Policy, 10 (4), 329–338.

INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF CANNABIS

Lopez, S. (2009). A visit to the medical marijuana doctor. Los Angeles Times, October 28. Available at:
http://www.latimes.com/news/local/la-me-lopez28-2009oct28,0,874874.column (accessed September
20, 2013).
Loucas, P.G. (2008). Regulating compassion: an overview of Canada’s federal medical cannabis policy and
practice. Harm Reduction Journal, 5, 5.
MacCoun, R.J. and Reuter, P. (2001). Drug War Heresies: Learning from Other Vices, Times, & Places.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McAllister, W. (2000). Drug Diplomacy in the Twentieth Century. London: Routledge.
Mechoulam, R. (ed.). (1973). Marijuana. New York: Academic Press.
MHRA (Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency). (2012a). A Guide to What is a Medicinal
Product. MHRA Guidance Note No. 8. Available at: http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/is-lic/
documents/publication/con007544.pdf (accessed September 18, 2012).
MHRA. (2012b). Borderline Products. Available at: http://www.mhra.gov.uk/Howweregulate/Medicines/
Doesmyproductneedalicence/Borderlineproducts/index.htm#l3 (accessed September 18, 2012).
MHRA. (2012c). Herbal Medicines Regulation: Unlicensed Herbal Medicines Supplied
by a Practitioner Following a One-to-One Consultation. Available at: http://
www.mhra.gov.uk/Howweregulate/Medicines/Herbalmedicinesregulation/
Unlicensedherbalmedicinessuppliedbyapractitionerfollowingaonetooneconsultation/index.htm
(accessed September 18, 2012).
Mills, J.H. (2003). Cannabis Britannica: Empire, Trade, and Prohibition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Musto, D.F. (1987). The History Of Legislative Control Over Opium, Cocaine, And Their Derivatives. In:
R. Hamowy (ed.). Dealing with Drugs: Consequences of Government Control. Lexington MA: Lexington
Books, pp. 37–71.
Musto, D.F. (1999). The American Disease: Origins of Narcotic Control. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Neuman, A. (2004) GHB’s Path to Legitimacy: An Administrative and Legislative History of Xyrem. [Paper
submitted for course requirement in Food and Drug Law, Winter Term 2004, Harvard Law School.]
Available at: http://dash.harvard.edu/bitstream/handle/1/9795464/Neuman.html?sequence=2 (accessed
September 20, 2013).
New York v United States. (1992) 505 U.S. 144.
OIG (Office of the Inspector General). (2012). Dietary supplements: companies may be difficult to locate
in an emergency. October 2012 OEI-01-11-00211. Washington, DC: US Department of Health & Public
Services.
O’Shaughnessy, W.B. (1839). On the preparations of the Indian hemp, or gunjah (Cannabis indica); their
effects on the animal system in health, and their utility in the treatment of tetanus and other convulsive
diseases. Transactions of the Medical and Physical Society of Bengal 1838–1840, 71–102, 421–461.
Pacula, R.L., MacCoun, R.J., Reuter, P., et al. (2004). What Does it Mean to Decriminalize Marijuana?
A Cross-National Empirical Examination. Center for the Study of Law and Society, Jurisprudence and
Social Policy Program, U.C. Berkeley. Available at: http://www.escholarship.org/uc/item/9v76p00j
(accessed September 20, 2013).
Printz v United States. (1997). 521 U.S. 898.
Ravin v State, 537 P.2d 494 (Ala. 1975).
Regina v Parker. (2000). CanLII 5762 (ON CA). Available at: http://www.canlii.org/en/on/onca/doc/2000/
2000canlii5762/2000canlii5762.html (accessed November 10, 2013).
Rendon, J. (2012). Super-Charged: How Outlaws, Hippies, and Scientists Reinvented Marijuana. Portland,
OR: Timber Press.
Room, R., Fischer, B., Hall, W., et al. (2010). Cannabis Policy: Moving Beyond Stalemate. Oxford: Beckley
Foundation.
Ross v Ragingwire Telecommunications. (2008). 42 Cal.4th 920, 70 Cal.Rptr.3d 382.

63

64

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Russo, E.B. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage
effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1344–1364.
Schneeman, B.O., Azarnoff, D.L., Christiansen, C.L., et al. (2005). Dietary Supplements: A Framework for
Evaluating Safety. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, Institute of Medicine.
Serrano, A. Uruguay Unveils Marijuana Regulation Details, May 3, 2014. Aljazeera America. http://america.
aljazeera.com/articles/2014/5/3/uruguay-unveils-marijuanaregulationdetails.html (accessed May 21,
2014).
Single, E. (1999). Options for cannabis reform. International Journal of Drug Policy, 10(4), 281–290.
Sinha, J. (2001). The History and Development of the Leading International Drug Control Conventions.
Report Prepared for The Senate Special Committee On Illegal Drugs. Ottawa: Canadian Library of
Parliament.
Randall, R.C. and O’Leary, A.M. (1998). Marijuana Rx: The Patients’ Fight for Medicinal Pot. New York:
Thunder’s Mouth Press.
UNODC. (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). (1953). Quasi-medical use of opium. Bulletin on
Narcotics, 3, 19–23. Available at: http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-analysis/bulletin/
bulletin_1953-01-01_3_page008.html (accessed September 10, 2012).
UNODC. (1962). The Cannabis Problem: a note on the problem and the history of international action.
Bulletin on Narcotics, 4, 27–31. Available at: http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-analysis/
bulletin/bulletin_1962-01-01_4_page005.html (accessed September 10, 2012).
Walton, R.P. (1938). Marihuana: America’s New Drug Problem. Philadelphia, PA: J.B. Lippincott Co.

Chapter 4

Cannabis Horticulture
David J. Potter

4.1 Introduction
Cannabis is a drug romantically associated by many with peace and love, as exalted by the youth
and countercultures that emerged in the 1960s. With the turn of the millennium, however, production of this soft drug became more commonly associated with hard crime, as organized gangs
muscled in on the lucrative production market. Reported associations between cannabis use and
distressful psychoses further tarnished the plant’s image. This imbalanced reputation overshadows the fact that, when used responsibly, the cannabis plant has proved to be a botanical paragon
of virtues, having supplied man with food, fiber, oil, and medicine for several millennia. It is
indeed likely that its medicinal use predated any recreational consumption. Evidence suggests
that the plant had a place in Ayurvedic (Russo 2004) and Chinese medicine (Mechoulam 1986)
at least as early as 3000 years ago. Its medicinal qualities have since been widely used across the
globe.
The World Health Organization has estimated that over 21,000 plant species are used for
medicinal purposes around the world, but only about 100 of these will be specifically grown for
the pharmaceutical industry (EUROPAM 2008). Cannabis is perhaps the only pharmaceutical
feedstock that is grown indoors. This provides the extra security that this highly marketable drug
requires. It also enables GW Pharmaceuticals to grow material with a higher level of control than
any outdoor-grown pharmaceutical crop.
GW Pharmaceuticals’ glasshouse facilities incorporate computerized horticultural management systems that deliver the temperatures, lighting levels, and day lengths required. The detailed
growing conditions are recorded, thus enabling each batch of plants to be certified as correctly
grown according to set parameters. Documentary control systems ensure the provenance and
authenticity of each batch. This is a pharmaceutical industry requirement and, because cannabis
is a Controlled Drug as defined by the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, it is also a strict Home Office
requirement.
Although experienced amateur cannabis producers often claim that cannabis growing is more
of an art than a science, propagation of cannabis for the pharmaceutical market is the strict preserve of the scientist. High standards of quality, safety, and efficacy are demanded of the medicine,
and this requires the starter material to be grown under rigorously controlled conditions. This is
especially the case when producing a complex botanical drug such as GW Pharmaceuticals’ first
licensed medicine Sativex®. A botanical or herbal drug such as this can be defined as a well characterized, multicomponent standardized medicine extracted from plant sources. Some of these
multicomponents in cannabis may act together synergistically (Russo 2011, Williamson 2001),
and hence relatively small variations in the ratios can have potentially large effects on the overall

66

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

activity. By growing the plants in tightly controlled uniform conditions, a consistent ratio of these
ingredients can be achieved.
The producers of cannabis for Sativex® manufacture needed to develop growing systems that
enabled the feedstock to be reliably and efficiently produced at all times of the year. It was also
essential to gain an understanding of how variations in growing conditions might affect the concentrations and ratios of the active ingredients within the plant. With the knowledge gained, the
horticultural team was better placed to agree a growing protocol that defined the tolerance levels
in growing conditions. In addition to Sativex®, the company has a pipeline of other medicines
derived from other cannabis genotypes in development. The optimum growing conditions and
timings for these new plants required optimization.
Much of the horticultural and agricultural research performed at GW Pharmaceuticals has
proved useful in the field of forensic science, and some of this is reported here. However, more
specific details are given regarding the parameters applying to the propagation of phytopharmaceutical raw material for pharmaceutical use.

4.2 Cannabis origins
It is generally accepted that the genus Cannabis originated in Central Asia, but a more precise
location is widely debated. The Himalayan foothills and Pamir Plain have been favored by some
researchers. A more westerly origin, in what is now Azerbaijan, has been suggested (de Bunge
1860) with others pointing much further east to Northwest China (Bouquet 1950). Western
China is the suggested source of Cannabis’s only close relative—the hop (Humulus spp.) (Neve
1991, p. 1) implying perhaps that the entire Cannabaceae family evolved in this area. Because of
its many qualities, over many millennia the cannabis plant became widely spread by man. With
or without human intervention, the species adapted to survive and indeed flourish in widely
contrasting climates and habitats. As a result, vastly different forms of the species now exist, some
just 20 cm in height when fully grown while other cultivated forms attain 6 m or more, although
1–3 m is more common (UNODC 2009a, p. 7). It is estimated that approximately one-third of
the earth’s land mass would be suitable for outdoor cannabis cultivation in some form, the most
southerly suggested location being 47°S in New Zealand (UNODC 2009b, p. 95). In the northern hemisphere, commercial oilseed hemp crops grow satisfactorily as far as 62°N in Finland
(Calloway and Laakkonen 1996) and some cannabis plants have been observed as far north as
66° N in Russia (Grigoryev 1998).

4.3 Morphology
Although occasionally existing as a perennial in subtropical to tropical areas (Emboden 1974),
Cannabis sativa L. is generally an annual, its growth pattern very much dictated by the seasons.
It is typically a short-day plant, only commencing to flower late in summer, once the day length
starts to fall. The species is naturally dioecious, by definition producing separate male and female
plants. However, because the sexes produce fiber with differing characteristics, fiber hemp varieties have been specifically bred to be monoecious (hermaphrodite), thereby producing a more
uniform crop (Small and Cronquist 1976).
The species is wind-pollinated. When mature, sepals on the male flowers open to expose the
anthers, which hang freely on fine filaments. The exposed anthers soon split to shed pollen
onto any passing air current. The males are typically taller than the females, giving them greater exposure to the passing breeze. The male and female plants continue to produce abundant

Cannabis Horticulture

inflorescences (clusters of flowers) for several days or weeks, and during this period, the females
form an abundance of receptive white (or more rarely pink or orange) stigmas. Once a pollen
grain is captured by the stigma, fertilization is enabled. With the cessation of flowering, and its
role fulfilled, the male dies. The pollinated females from the same population also cease flowering,
but survive for much longer as they set seed.
The female inflorescences are, by definition indeterminate. These flower clusters never produce
a true terminal flower. If grown in the absence of pollen, the period of development of new flowers
within the seed-free inflorescence is unnaturally extended. As new flowers continue to develop,
unnaturally large inflorescences can form and the yield of floral material is increased. This allfemale form of cannabis is almost ubiquitous in indoor illicit growing operations, and is widely
referred to as sinsemilla (from Spanish, meaning without seeds).

4.4 Secondary metabolite distribution
The value of cannabis as a recreational or medicinal drug is attributable to the presence of a
number of terpenophenolic secondary metabolites called cannabinoids. (Secondary metabolites
are by definition organic compounds not directly involved in normal growth, development or
reproduction of organisms.) Although it is often erroneously claimed that molecules of this type
are only found in cannabis, some are detectable elsewhere in the plant kingdom, e.g., Helichrysum
spp. (Bohlman and Hoffman 1979), albeit in extremely low levels. Cannabis sativa L. is certainly
unique in producing cannabinoids in such high concentrations and indeed few plant species
exceed such a concentration of any secondary metabolites.
The cannabinoids are not evenly distributed throughout the plant. They are totally absent from
the roots and seeds. Dried stem material of a drug variety will typically contain around 0.3% or
less tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) (Fritschi et al. 2006; Potter 2004, p. 28). The lower leaves contain less than 1% and mixed samples, which contain all the foliage including the uppermost leaves
of female plants, will more typically contain 2–3% THC (Potter and Duncombe 2012; UNODC
2009a, p. 14). However, unpollinated, all-female floral material is by far the main source of THC
and most other cannabinoids. A THC content of well over 20% can be found in some samples. It
must be emphasized though that the cannabinoid content of floral material is extremely variable
within a single plant (Potter 2013), and high content values in small samples are often not truly
representative of the plants from which they came (EMCDDA 2004). The cannabinoids cannabichromene (CBC) and cannabichromevarin (CBCV) are more commonly associated with juvenile
tissue and, except in specifically bred genotypes, these are typically more dominant in foliage.
The marked variation in concentration of cannabinoids in individual plant tissues is mainly due
to the presence or absence of small structures called glandular or capitate trichomes. It is widely
accepted that the cannabinoids are predominantly, or more likely entirely, synthesized and sequestered in these structures (Mahlberg et al. 1984). Most of the monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes in
cannabis are also found here (Malingré et al. 1975; Turner et al. 1980). Being so important, when
considering cannabinoid production, these structures are now described in some detail.

4.5 Cannabis trichome form and function
The general term trichome, when applied to plants, refers to a type of epidermal appendage. They
exist throughout the plant kingdom in an extremely diverse number of forms, of which over
300 have been described (Payne 1978). Their diversity has attracted much attention since the
earliest microscopists studied them and recorded their detail (Hooke 1665). Trichomes can be

67

68

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

broadly segregated into nonglandular and glandular types, both of which are found on cannabis.
Nonglandular trichomes, in the form of simple plant hairs, occur in the majority of vascular
plants, but glandular trichomes are found in just 20–30% (Dell and McComb 1978). Fossilized
remains of the fern Blanzeopteris praedentata reveal that glandular trichomes existed at least as
long as 300 million years ago, in the Late Carboniferous period (Krings et al. 2003). The functions
of trichomes are either guessed at or totally unknown, and many of the hypotheses have not been
experimentally tested (Werker 2000). Suggestions include the deterrence of predators and protection against environmental stresses. Reviews by Werker (2000) and Wagner et al. (2004) described
17 different trichome functions, many of which could be applicable to cannabis.
Because of their importance, cannabis trichomes have been studied in depth for many years, a
notable example being the detailed descriptive and illustrated work of Briosi and Tognini (1894),
which is still regularly quoted. A sample of this work is shown in Fig. 4.2A. Two nonglandular
types exist, neither of which is associated with cannabinoid and/or terpenoid production. Three
types of glandular trichome have been described on female cannabis, viz., bulbous, capitate-­
sessile and capitate-stalked. Males have been found to exhibit a fourth type—the antherial glandular trichome (Fairbairn 1972). Detailed trichome studies have given a greater understanding of
the biogenesis and distribution of the cannabinoids (Dayanandan and Kaufman 1976). Mahlberg
et al. (1984) showed that capitate sessile and stalked trichomes differed in their distribution, as
well as in their cannabinoid content and profile, and this was linked to the differing cannabinoid
distribution in the plant.
The five trichomes associated with female cannabis plants include the nonglandular simple
unicellular trichomes and the cystolythic trichomes. Simple trichomes, also known as covering
trichomes, can first be seen on the surface of cotyledons immediately after germination. They
continue to develop in abundance on the underside of leaves (and to a much lesser extent on
the upper surface) throughout the plant’s life. By covering the underside of the leaf with a layer
of trapped air, a pubescence of trichomes reduces water loss and provides some insulation
against extreme temperatures (Ehleringer 1984). Cystolythic trichomes are first observed on
the upper surface of the initial pair of true leaves on a cannabis seedling and give the foliage a
rough texture. At the base of each is a concretion of calcium carbonate crystals called a cystolyth
(Dayanandan and Kaufman 1976). These tough trichomes would presumably reduce the palatability of the foliage to leaf-eating predators. Phytodermatitis and hives in cannabis growers have
been linked to long-term exposure to cannabis herbage, and abrasive cystolythic trichomes are
the suspected cause. The high concentrations of oxalic acid in cannabis foliage could exacerbate
these effects.
Of greater significance to the pharmacologist is the existence and roles of the glandular trichomes, which are described in turn in sections 4.5.1–4.5.3.
4.5.1 Capitate sessile trichomes

Apart from on the cotyledons and the supporting hypocotyl, sessile trichomes are observed on
all other aerial epidermal surfaces. The example shown in Fig. 4.1 was a rare find, being perfectly
situated on a leaf edge and viewable in profile. The trichome can be seen to possess a somewhat
flattened hemispherical structure, commonly referred to as the resin head, with a disc of secretory cells at its base. This resin head is connected to the green mesophyll cells of the leaf via a
stalk, which is normally hidden from view. Within the mesophyll tissue, photosynthesis generates sugars, some of which are then channeled to the secretory cells where they fuel cannabinoid
and terpene biosynthesis. Above the secretory cells, and below the trichome’s outer membrane,

Cannabis Horticulture

Fig. 4.1 (See also colour plate section.) A capitate sessile trichome observed on the edge of one of
the first pair of true leaves of a cannabis seedling. (Scale bar = 25µm.)

is a chamber within which a resinous mixture of cannabinoids and essential oils is sequestered
(Mahlberg et al. 1984). The trichome’s function is not known, but across the plant kingdom its role
is guessed to be the protection of the plant tissue against predators. Sessile trichomes on cannabis
contain, amongst other things, bitter tasting sesquiterpenes that reduce palatability. This form of
trichome is found in many other plant families and, due to its flattened shape and short stalk, is
often referred to as a peltate trichome, the name being derived from the Latin word pelta—a shorthandled, hand-held, round shield. This name is especially appropriate, considering its suggested
defensive role.
The botanically unique combination of cystolythic hairs on the adaxial (upper) leaf surface and
longer trichomes and sessile glands on the abaxial surface, enables positive forensic identification
of Cannabis sativa L., even when restricted to fragmented material (UNODC 2009a).
4.5.2 Capitate stalked trichomes

These trichomes proliferate on the calyx, bracteoles, bracts, and accompanying petioles of female
plants, but are much less common on males. Capitate stalked trichomes are the most complex
type. They develop a resin head, similar to that of the sessile type, but in mature specimens this
is surmounted on a multicellular stalk (Fig. 4.2B). This stalk incorporates an active channel of
hypodermal cells, through which nutrients are transported to the resin head from the phloem.
It is near impossible to distinguish between sessile and immature glandular stalked trichomes,
where the stalk is yet to form. When fully developed the resin heads on capitate stalked trichomes
typically reach 100 µm in diameter. This is approximately twice the breadth of, and consequently
eight times the volume of, an average sessile trichome, thus enabling it to sequester a much greater
quantity of cannabinoid.

69

A

C

B

D

Fig. 4.2 (See also colour plate section.) (A) An illustration of a capitate stalked trichome on Cannabis
sativa by Briosi and Tognini (1894).
Reproduced from Briosi, G. and Tognini, F., Intorna alla anatomia deila canapa Cannabis sativa L. Parte prima: Organi sessuali. Atti 1st Bot. Pavia, 2(3), pp. 91–209, 1894.

(B) A capitate stalked trichome, temporarily mounted in glycerol and viewed in transmitted light.
Reproduced from Potter, D. J. “The propagation, characterisation and optimisation of cannabis as a phytopharmaceutical” © 2009, The Author..

(C) A glandular trichome with partly abscised resin head.
Reproduced from Potter, D. J. “The propagation, characterisation and optimisation of cannabis as a phytopharmaceutical” © 2009, The Author..

(D) Like an undocked Apollo Landing Module, a detached capitate stalked trichome resin head
floats into the void.(Electron microscope view, D.J. Potter and G. Vizcay, Centre for Ultrastructural
Imaging, Kings College London.)

Cannabis Horticulture

As in the sessile form, the resin head incorporates a disk of secretory cells at the base, its secretions being sequestered within the resin head. The contents of the resin head are crystal clear during the earlier stages of development, and in many cases remain so, right up to the fully mature
harvest stage. However, it is common as the plant ages for these trichomes to become translucent
or almost opaque white. Excessive ageing sometimes results in the resin heads turning brown.
This coloration is often seen to commence within the disk of secretory cells, and is possibly due to
necrosis of the by-now inactive tissues. This browning continues after plants had been harvested
and dried.
Many guides in the gray literature advise that cannabis plants are at peak potency and ready for
harvest only when the capitate stalked trichomes are at the milky white stage. However, a study
of over 300 dry cannabis samples indicated minimal correlation between trichome color and
potency, except in relation to darker brown samples, which are clearly past the peak of potency
(Potter 2009, p.77).
One change in trichome morphology, that is sometimes associated with ageing, is the partial
separation of the trichome resin head from the trichome stalk (Fig. 4.2C). Complete separation of
the resin head from the stalk occurs during hashish manufacture. The highest potency preparations will contain almost nothing apart from the excised trichome resin heads (Fig. 4.2D).
On the female plant’s calyx, bracteoles, bracts, and associated petioles the capitate stalked trichomes can be seen to form a dense pubescence (Fig. 4.3A), which would act as a physical barrier
to small phytophagous insects. Like the covering of simple hairs on the underside of leaves, this
pubescence would act as a garment, providing some protection against desiccating cold winds
(Mahlberg et al. 1984). By reflecting infrared light, a dense trichome pubescence has cooling
properties and, being effective across the complete light spectrum, it also reflects ultraviolet (UV)
light (Roberecht and Caldwell 1980). Phenolic resins like the cannabinoids have also been shown
to offer UV protection by absorbing the harmful radiation (Rhodes 1977). This is especially welcome in floral structures housing gametophytic tissues, which are susceptible to damage by UV-B
radiation (Caldwell et al. 1983).
Struggling insects are frequently found trapped to the resin heads of these trichomes, thereby inhibiting them from further feeding and reproduction (Fig. 4.3B). This defensive insect

A

B

Fig. 4.3 (See also colour plate section.) (A) A dense pubescence of glandular stalked trichomes on a
bract within a cannabis female inflorescence. The orange/brown structures are senesced stigmas.
(B) Two young cotton-melon aphids (Aphis gossypii) irreversibly adhered to the resin heads of
capitate stalked trichomes.

71

72

Constituents, History, International Control, Cultivation, and Phenotypes of Cannabis

entrapment role of trichomes is observed in many other plant species, e.g., lucerne, Medicago
sativa (Shade et al. 1975), Pelargonium spp. (Walters et al. 1991), and the wild potato (Solanum
berthaultii) (Kowalski et al. 1992). A common insect pest on Cannabis in UK studies is the cotton
melon aphid, Aphis gossypii. Usually found as a predator on the underside of younger leaves, this
insect occasionally wanders onto the resinous inflorescence and is seen to struggle desperately
as it becomes ensnared on the capitate stalked trichomes. When attacked by predators, Aphis
gossypii can emit an alarm pheromone to warn others of danger (Byers 2005). It is possible that a
trichome-ensnared aphid responds similarly during the tussle. One of the most common pests of
cannabis, the tobacco thrip, Thrips tobaci, is often similarly trapped. It too is capable of emitting
an alarm pheromone (Anathakrishnan 1993). If this theory is correct, the loss of a few trichomes
to insects could discourage a more extensive attack on the floral tissue.
Restricted allocation of capitate stalked trichomes to floral tissue is widespread throughout the
plant kingdom, where plants optimize investment in defense by allocating secondary metabolites
to tissues in direct proportion to their value (Herms and Mattson 1992). It is notable that sessile
trichomes play no part in insect entrapment, suggesting that these had a different function, likely
relying more specifically on their bitter caryophyllene content to deter herbivorous attack. When
separate, fresh capitate stalked and sessile trichomes have been removed from the same plant and
analyzed, the capitate stalked samples exhibit a much higher proportion of volatile monoterpenes,
which give the trichome contents a solvent-based adhesive quality (Potter 2009, pp. 96–97). The
cannabinoids cannabigerolic acid and tetrahydrocannabinolic acid have been shown to cause
apoptosis in insect cells, and it has been suggested that this is an important defensive role for
cannabinoids in capitate stalked and sessile trichomes (Sirikantaramas et al. 2005). The different
ratios of cannabinoids and terpenes, between floral-derived stalked trichomes and more foliarderived sessile trichomes, emphasizes the importance of maintaining a consistent balance of leaf
and flower material when the material is used to manufacture a complex botanical drug, such as
Sativex®.
4.5.3 Bulbous trichomes

With a diameter of approximately 10–20 µm, these are the smallest of the glandular trichomes
(Fig. 4.4). First seen on the stem and the lower leaves, these are widespread across the entire
surface of the aerial part of the plant. Connected to the epidermis by two cells (the top one much

A

B

C

Fig. 4.4 (See also colour plate section.) (A) A small bulbous trichome alongside a fully developed glandular stalked trichome. The contrast in resin head diameter (10 µm vs. 100 µm) is clear. (B) A simple
bulbous trichome and (C) a complex bulbous trichome. These are 10–15 µm in diameter.

Cannabis Horticulture

larger than the lower) these produce a simple, spherical glandular head or a rarer, complex, multicompartmented glandular head (Fig. 4.4C). Their function is not known. Being so small, they
potentially contribute little to the secondary metabolites of the plant.
Specifically bred cannabigerol (CBG)-rich chemotypes produce characteristically opaque white
sessile and stalked trichome resin heads, due to the unnatural accumulation of CBG (de Meijer
2005). The bulbous trichomes on these chemotypes remain clear, suggesting a lack of cannabinoid
in this trichome type. It is possible that a present or past role of the bulbous trichomes may be to
alert the cannabis plant to insect movement on its surface, as has been observed to be the case in a
small form of trichome in tomato (Tooker et al. 2010). In the latter’s case, once ruptured by predatory insect movement, the resultant chemical release stimulates increased development of larger
glandular trichome forms, thus boosting the plant’s defense capabilities.
4.5.4 Nature’s justification for phytocannabinoid biosynthesis

The specific roles of the cannabinoids within the glandular trichomes are much debated.
Throughout the plant kingdom, trichomes biosynthesize a wide range of true terpenes, containing just carbon and hydrogen (e.g., myrcene C10H16), or more oxygenated relatives such as the
terpene alcohols and ketones (e.g., menthol and menthone C10H20O and C10H18O) along with
various terpene aldehydes (e.g., geranial C10H16O) and esters (e.g., geranyl acetate C12H20O2
(Croteau and Johnson 1984). It is notable that in cannabis at least 90% of the terpene family of
chemicals found there are pure terpenes, devoid of oxygen (Mediavilla and Steinemann 1997).
The cannabinoids are strong antioxidants, similar in performance to vitamin E. Perhaps they
have a role in maintaining the reduced state of these terpenes, which for some reason the cannabis
plant, through evolution, has found advantageous. As stated earlier, the cannabinoids’ main function may be to absorb damaging UV light, and to act somewhat unromantically, as a vital ingredient in a simple solvent-based adhesive. Here the plant’s preference for true monoterpenes, over
more oxygenated counterparts like the terpene alcohols, may be down to the fact that they are the
most readily volatalized, increasing the speed with which the ruptured trichome contents solidify.
Some of the suggested defensive functions of trichomes just described may seem tenuous.
However, they are supported by the profound words of Charles Darwin, in his On the Origin of
Species (Darwin 1859) that:
Individuals having any advantage, however slight, over others, would have the best chance of surviving
and procreating their kind.

4.5.5 Isolation of trichomes for pharmaceutical use

The World Drug Report 2009 (UNODC 2009b, p. 12) estimated that between 2.2 and 9.9 million
tons of cannabis resin (hashish) were produced a year. Most of this would be for recreational use.
Cannabis resin is principally made from capitate stalked glandular trichomes. These are
removed from the plant, in a variety of cultural methods, and then compressed to make a solid
mass. Indian hashish was the starter material used by Dr. William O’Shaughnessy in 1841 to make
the first cannabis-based medicines introduced to Western medicine.
Modern methods have been developed in which brittle trichomes are first dislodged by agitating cannabis in iced water. The trichome laden liquid is then sieved to separate the resin heads
from the remaining pulp. Jansen and Terris (2002) reported that, with a Dutch Government
subsidy, this technique had been adapted to make hashish for pharmaceutical research purposes.

73

74

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Although usually performed to collect capitate stalked trichome resin heads from floral tissue,
it can also be used to produce sessile trichome-based hashish. This proved especially useful in the
production of CBC-rich resin (Potter 2009, p. 93).

4.6 Plant development
4.6.1 Natural outdoor cultivation of cannabis

Cannabis is in most cases a short-day plant, flowering at the end of summer and setting seed
before the arrival of winter. Prior to flowering, the plant diverts maximum energy into the production of stems and foliage. In a commercial hemp crop especially, this growth is vigorous
enough to outcompete most weeds, and herbicide use is rarely needed. When the so-called critical
day length is reached, floral development is stimulated. The plant is actually responding to changes in conformation of light-sensitive phytochrome protein dimers that occur during darkness
(Halliday and Fankauser 2003). The critical day length for an individual variety is greatly affected
by its geographical origin, and would generally be greatest in those plants derived well away from
the equator (de Meijer and Keizer 1994). Exceptions to this response occur in plants adapted to
grow in equatorial regions, where there is minimal variation in day length. Flowering in tropical
cannabis plants is more closely related to plant age.
In short-day types, the ability to measure the night-length would appear to be remarkably
accurate. Experimental outdoor crops of one variety, grown outdoors by GW Pharmaceuticals
over 10 successive years in Southern England at latitude 51°N, always exhibited their first flowers within 4 days of August 26, irrespective of planting date and prevailing weather. Tests suggest
that the critical day length for this variety, at which flowering is initiated, is 14 h 20 min. This
variety was in fact bred from plants naturalized in Turkey at latitude 41°N, where a day length
of 14 h 20 min occurs approximately 3 weeks earlier at the beginning of August. This illustrates
that when growing any genotype outdoors, at a more extreme latitude than its original home, a
delay in flowering is to be expected. As a consequence, there is a reduction in the number of days
available for floral development before unfavorable winter conditions arrive. In Canada, most
Western US states and Northern Europe, the climate is mostly unfavorable for floral development of most drug-type varieties, making indoor or glasshouse propagation the only reliable
local option.
4.6.2 Indoor growth of cannabis

Since the 1970s, in those locations in the US and Canada where outdoor growing is possible, a law
enforcement crackdown and large-scale eradication efforts may have inadvertently encouraged
more growers indoors (UNODC 2008, p. 14). In recent decades the Western cannabis market
has changed, with an increasing proportion preferring to consume only unfertilized floral parts
of the female cannabis plant (sinsemilla), and most of it is grown indoors (Leggett 2006). In the
more easily controlled indoor environment, the quality of this material is increasingly guaranteed
(UNODC 2009b, p. 97). Quality is an even greater consideration in pharmaceutical cannabis
production, and indoor growing makes it possible to provide the higher level of environmental
control required to achieve this.
Within the indoor environment, to produce a high yielding crop of desirable quality, the grower
has to create a favorable environment and manipulate the plants’ natural flowering response to
changing day length.

Cannabis Horticulture

4.6.2.1 Selection of best genetic material

In the licensed and illicit arena, a grower can commence activity with either seeds or rooted
clones from a reliable source. The latter, of course, should only be from female plants with proven
genetics.
Growing batches of plants from clones guarantees that all the new plants produced are genetically identical to the source of propagation material. This greatly improves the uniformity of
the final product. Even if grown from seeds derived from just two parents, there will always be
a large degree of natural variation between sibling seedlings. It is common practice to initially
plant seeds, and then take cuttings from the best performing candidates. This ultimately results
in higher performing, as well as more uniform, plant populations. To achieve this, more than one
cutting has to be taken from each seedling and at least one induced to flower, while another in
maintained in vegetative growth (as described in section 4.6.2.2). When mature, the flowering
plants are assessed for their agronomic performance (vigor, yield, resin gland density, etc.) and,
then ideally analyzed for chemical content by one of several forms of chromatography. Having
identified the best flowering plant, vegetative cuttings derived from the same seedling source are
used for all ongoing propagation.
4.6.2.2 Encouraging vegetative growth

To maximize yields, indoor cannabis crops are initially grown in an artificial long-day length
environment, to establish a good vegetative structure. This day length must exceed the critical
day length (section 4.6.1) to avoid the initiation of the flowering process. Sufficient vegetative
growth is most rapidly achieved by maintaining an artificial environment of 24 h day length, for
approximately 3 weeks. However, some growers opt for a shorter day length of as little as 18 h. In
2006, Leggett reported that:
The choice of an 18 hour day/6 hour night regime for the vegetative phase appeared to be returning
to vogue because, while continual light can increase yields, this advantage is offset by the expense of
additional lighting. (Leggett 2006, p. 17)

Recent observations at illicit cannabis crime scenes, set up by organized criminal gangs in the UK,
suggests that an 18 h day length for the vegetative phase is popular even amongst growers who
abstract (steal) their electrical energy.
A GW Pharmaceuticals study compared the growth rates of eight varieties in day lengths of 18
and 24 h. After 3 weeks the plants in the 18 h day length (mean height 32.3 cm, dry foliage weight
4.00 g) were shorter and lighter than those in a 24 h day length (mean 36.2 cm and 7.34 g). The
reduction in height was not statistically significant (paired 2-tailed t-test, p = 0.054) but the weight
decrease was highly so (p = 2.53 × 10−5).
Compared to plants grown in 24 h days for 21 days, plants grown more slowly in 18 h days
were judged to have achieved a similar stage of development after 25 days. However, there were
differences in morphology, which included a significantly greater mean height in the 18 h day
length/25-day regime, plants (39.7 cm vs. 36.2 cm, p = 0.033). Although they had produced a
similar weight of stem, the mean dry weight of foliage was significantly reduced (5.51 g vs. 4.38 g/
plant, p = 0.0011.) An increase in height without a concomitant increase in stem weight results in
a less robust plant. To produce a similar mass of foliage to the plants in the 24 h day length/21-day
regime, plants in 18 h would have required closer to 28 days, at which point the total quantity of
light energy emitted would have been the same. The policy of using a 24 h day length during the
vegetative period was hence vindicated by this study.

75

76

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

4.6.2.3 Thigmomorphogenesis

In a growth room environment, in the irradiance conditions typically used for an unlicensed crop,
excessive height gain is rarely a problem. However, in a glasshouse setting this can be an issue,
especially when growing specifically bred pharmaceutical crops with a high degree of hybrid
vigor. The preference is to suppress the tendency of some glasshouse grown varieties to produce
excessive height during this phase. Adapting a trick from the culinary herb industry, known as
thigmomorphogenesis or mechanical perturbation, the stems are brushed almost flat on a daily
basis for the first 2–3 weeks. Responding as they would if buffeted by wind, the plants produce
stockier thicker stems, more able to support the coming canopy of heavy resinous flowers.
4.6.2.4 Mother plant stock

To initially guarantee adequate vegetative material for production of cuttings, and to avoid the
carefully selected genetics being lost, a sufficient number of ‘mother’ plants have to be retained
in long-day length. However, once production has stabilized, it is often possible to simply acquire
cuttings by removing lower branches from the production crop. Minimal valuable growing space
therefore needs be dedicated to mother plant propagation.
4.6.2.5 Induction and maintenance of floral development

It is an almost ubiquitous recommendation, in all indoor cannabis growing guides, that flowering should be induced and maintained by placing plants in a 12 h day length. Observations at
illicit cannabis plantations support this widespread practice. Ironically, in a natural environment at many latitudes, a 12 h day length would herald the end of the flowering process, not its
induction. Indeed Pliny the Elder, referring to crops in what is now the Aegean coastal area of
Turkey, suggested a few days after the equinox as an ideal harvest time (Pliny c.60ad/1951). As
stated earlier (section 4.6.1), one variety used by GW Pharmaceuticals was suggested to have a
critical day length of 14 h 20 min. By inducing the plant to flower in a 12 h regime, the flowering
plant is apparently being deprived of at least 2 h of potentially beneficial light energy. However,
glasshouse-based studies support the belief that the 12 h day is the optimum. Tests showed that
while consuming more energy, a 13 h day produced more biomass, and often taller plants, but no
increase in total weight of cannabinoid. Conversely, a reduced day length of 11 h produced a proportional decrease in yield (Potter 2009, pp. 140–141). GW Pharmaceuticals continues therefore
to use a 12 h day length for flowering period as this minimizes cost and environmental impact
attributable to electrical consumption.
Once placed in a 12 h day length, stem and foliar development initially continue, but both slow
down and eventually stop after 3–4 weeks. Floral development, however, remains vigorous for
many weeks before slowing down. As a result, the ratio of floral to foliar material is continually
increasing, as shown in Fig. 4.5. This is an important consideration for GW Pharmaceuticals,
who use the flowers and leaves as a feedstock for their medicine. This leaf and flower mixture is
referred to as botanical raw material (BRM). As the foliar and floral materials within the BRM differ in secondary metabolite concentration and profile, any alteration to harvest timing will potentially affect the leaf/flower ratio and the overall secondary metabolite content of this feedstock.
It is important to emphasize that the foliage weighed to obtain the data shown in Fig. 4.5
included the leaves from the stems and branches, plus the outer bracts of the inflorescence.
Research by de Backer et al. (2012) showed that the overall THC concentration of inflorescence
material increases rapidly during early floral development before finally stabilizing. However, the
majority of sinsemilla cannabis supplied for recreational use consists of the innermost parts of
the inflorescence only. The bracts that form the outer part of the inflorescence produce far fewer

Cannabis Horticulture

Mean dry weight per plant (gms)

80
70
60
50
40

Flower

30

Foliage

20
10
0

0

1

2

3
4
5
6
Weeks in short days

7

8

9

Fig. 4.5 The mean weight of foliar and floral material (± standard deviation, n = 4) in batches of
plants (Sativex® THC chemotype) harvested between 0 and 9 weeks after placement in 12h day
length.

glandular trichomes, and hence lack potency. These are removed in a process known colloquially as manicuring. The ratio of resinous floral tissue to less potent outer bract material increases
as the inflorescence grows. With the outer bract tissue removed, the cannabinoid content of the
manicured material produced within the inflorescence is much more consistent, as shown in Fig.
4.6. The plants used in this study were clones of the THC chemotype used for Sativex® production. This suggests that, throughout inflorescence development, if conditions are stable the plant
will divert a steady proportion of available assimilates to trichome and cannabinoid formation. In
effect the plant equally vigorously defends the oldest and youngest florets.
Additional studies showed that, within the range of irradiance levels typically used for indoor
cannabis production, altering the irradiance levels had no effect on the THC concentration of the
floral material. Increasing the light level, however, did increase the flower to foliage weight ratio
(Potter and Duncombe 2012). This emphasizes the desirability of maintaining uniform light conditions, when producing BRM containing a mixture of leaf and flower material, each of which has
slightly different secondary metabolite profiles.
The optimum period in short-day length before harvest varies according to the genotype. A
survey of the recommended time for 200 commercially available cannabis varieties showed an
average of 57 days with 88% of varieties having an optimum short-day requirement of between 7
and 9 weeks. The majority of the remainder were slower-growing varieties that are more likely to
be of interest only to growers with specialized interests (EMCDDA 2012, p. 34).
20

% THC

15
10
5
0

4

5

6
7
8
Weeks in 12 h days

9

Fig. 4.6 The THC concentration
(± standard deviation, n = 4) of
manicured inflorescence material from plants (Sativex® THC
chemotype) sampled at weekly
intervals, 4–9 weeks after
placement in short days.

77

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Towards the end of the flowering process, plant growth slows and fewer new florets are formed
within the inflorescence. The relative proportion of fertile and senesced stigmas is a guide to the
slowing of growth. Recreational cannabis users would often harvest their plants when about 95%
of the visible stigmas had senesced, but this would vary according to the variety and the grower’s
personal preference (Clarke 1981, p. 135). As well as considerations of yield and potency, harvest
timing is suggested to affect the taste of the final product. However, in the case of a pharmaceutical crop, appropriate harvest timing can be important to ensure that the correct proportions of
controlled secondary metabolites are present. A notable variation affected by early or late harvest
is the ratio of THC or CBD to their precursor CBG. When the CBG:THC ratios were assessed in
25 cloned accessions, from a range of varieties, the average proportion of CBG in the CBG + THC
total, assessed after 6, 8, and 10 weeks in short-day length, was 3.7%, 3.2%, and finally 2.7%. Both
decreases in CBG proportion were highly significant (p = 0.021 and p < 0.01) (Potter 2009, p. 127).
However, to put these variations into context, these maturity-related differences were small in
relation to the differences observed between varieties, where CBG concentrations varied between
0.5 and 10% of the CBG + THC total.
Separate tests have compared the monoterpene and sesquiterpene profiles of the chemotypes
used to produce THC and CBD for Sativex®. These were seen to vary little over this same period
(Potter 2009, pp. 96–97).
4.6.2.6 Effect of irradiance level on plant and cannabinoid yield

During the first year of regular propagation at GW Pharmaceuticals, a large seasonal yield variation was observed, with winter yields down by half. The cannabinoid content (w/w) of BRM
(flower and leaf) of winter crops was as little as half that of summer crops. As a consequence of the
combined drop in crop-yield and potency the cannabinoid yield of winter crops was found to be
roughly a quarter of that achieved in summer. This was despite the presence of a supplementary
lighting system within the glasshouse, using mercury vapor lamps, that boosted winter irradiance
levels by 17 W m−2 of photosynthetically active radiation [PAR]. This is typical of that installed in
the well-equipped glasshouses producing salad crops. To achieve acceptable year-round uniformity of cannabis plants, a new extremely bright supplementary lighting system, using high-pressure
sodium lamps, was introduced that produced 55 W m−2 [PAR]. As a result, only a small seasonal
variation in yield remained. By boosting dull daylight levels throughout the year, yields of weekly
harvested crops were significantly increased (paired t-test, p < 0.001 (Fig. 4.7).
The requirement for such high levels of supplementary lighting is understandable. At the temperate latitude 50º N in southern England, average solar radiation levels are approximately half

Mercury
Sodium

700
600
500
400
300
200
100

N
FE
B
M
AR
AP
R
M
AY
JU
N
JU
L
AU
G
SE
P
O
CT
N
O
V
D
EC

0

JA

Fig. 4.7 The average yield of
the THC chemovar before and
after the replacement of mercury vapor lamps (17 W m−2)
with high pressure sodium
lamps (55 W m−2) of improved
supplementary lighting (±
standard deviation). The mean
is typically for four crops per
month. No crop was harvested
in April of the first year.

Yield g/sq m

78

Harvest month

Cannabis Horticulture

those encountered at 30º N, in the semitropical environment existing at such important cannabis
growing regions as Nepal, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Mexico (Albuisson et al. 2006). Although
Cannabis sativa L. grown for fiber or seed is often planted at the more northerly latitude, the
THC chemotype grown outdoors for its cannabinoid content is more commonly found at latitudes of 30º or less (Small and Beckstead 1973a, 1973b). In addition to the suboptimal natural
irradiance conditions falling on the GW Pharmaceuticals’ glasshouse, due to latitude, the natural
light levels reaching the plants is further weakened by the fact that transmission through a typical glass roof is reduced by at least 30% (Heuvelink et al. 1995). Supplementary lighting has been
increasingly used in commercial glasshouses in the UK for salad crop production. Such installations provide up to 40 W m−2 [PAR], while commercial glasshouses growing some ornamental
plants, such as Dendrobium orchids are recommended to use as much as 50 W m−2 [PAR].
The installation of a commercial scale glasshouse supplementary lighting system, delivering
55 W m−2 [PAR] over an area of 5000 m−2, as used at GW Pharmaceuticals, is highly unusual
in the UK. During the winter months, this lighting system remains permanently switched on,
throughout the day. As summer approaches, fewer hours of supplementary lighting are required
each day. Over the course of the whole year, approximately half the light energy falling on the
crop is provided by electrical lamps.
Glasshouse growing is unusual amongst illicit cannabis growers, who correctly feel that their
crops would be too easily detected. Therefore much more energy-intensive indoor growing is
the norm. As an alternative to glasshouse growing, GW Pharmaceuticals has also produced
cannabis in a totally solid building, where crops would not be exposed to seasonal changes in
light levels. The irradiance levels of the installed lighting system initially delivered 75 W m−2
[PAR]. Crop yields achieved in the first full year of growth were monitored. Yields showed a
slight downward trend, commensurate with the manufacturer’s predicted age-related fall in
irradiance from their lamps. The variation in mean monthly yield resulting from this fading
lamp performance, was compared statistically to the small seasonal variation in yield that persisted after the installation of high pressure sodium (HPS) supplementary lighting. No significant difference in mean monthly yield was observed (F-test, p > 0.05) between the two growing
environments.
It should be stressed that the irradiance level in the solid building (75 W m−2 [PAR]) is half that
typically utilized by illicit and independent cannabis producers. The numerous printed and online
growing guides repeatedly recommend a HPS lighting system, primarily using 600 W HPS lamps,
consuming between 400 and 600 watts per square meter of crop (Potter and Duncombe 2012;
Vanhove et al. 2011). A forensic study of the lighting installations, at illicit cannabis growth rooms
in the Netherlands, reported a median electrical energy consumption per unit area of 510 W m−2
(Toonen et al. 2006). HPS lamps typically convert about 30% of the electricity consumed into PAR
(Langton et al. 2001). This suggests therefore that the predicted median irradiance at Netherlands
crime scenes would deliver an of irradiance level 150 W m−2 [PAR].
This highlights the typical illicit growers’ desire for maximum yield. The potential cost of this
light energy has been calculated to approximate to 1 g of dry floral material for every kW hour
used by the lighting system during the growth of the crop (EMCDDA 2012, p. 35). However, it
is extremely common for illicit growers to be using abstracted (stolen) electricity, where energy
consumption and cost is often not a consideration. The police have estimated that the value of this
stolen electricity at around £200 million per year in the UK alone (BBC 2012).
Cannabis growth is strongly correlated to light intensity (Chandra et al. 2008) and greater yields
are achieved by consuming vast quantities of electrical energy. Light is vital for photosynthesis,
which enables plants to produce the sugars and proteins necessary for structural development.

79

80

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Biosynthesis of THC, and the accompanying essential oils in cannabis, demands especially high
amounts of energy. The amount of energy required to biosynthesize terpenoid molecules has been
calculated to be up to three times greater than that required to synthesize an equivalent weight
of sugars (Gershenzon 1994). The amount of prevailing light energy therefore has a potential
effect on cannabinoid content as well as yield. This possibility is supported by the much debated
carbon nutrient balance (CNB) which predicts that, in an environment where the availability of
nitrogen is limited (as is possible in the last weeks of cannabis growth), increasing availability of
carbon from photosynthesis will result in plants producing greater proportions of carbon-based
defense chemicals (Herms and Mattson 1992). A recent study has shown that, when light intensity
is increased, the overall THC content of the cannabis plant is boosted, as predicted by the CNB
hypothesis (Potter and Duncombe 2012). However, this is due to plants in brighter conditions
producing proportionally more female flowers, which contain a greater concentration of THC
than foliage. The same study, and additional research by Vanhove et al. ( 2011) have shown that
within the range of light conditions typically used by indoor cannabis growers, light intensity does
not affect the potency (THC concentration) of this floral material.
4.6.2.7 The emergence of Autoflowering cannabis

The requirement for a short day length for induction of flowering is not necessary in some
genotypes. As stated earlier, those plants adapted to growing in equatorial locations experience minimal variation in natural day length, and flowering in tropical cannabis plants is more
closely related to plant age. Similarly, commencement of flowering is not controlled by day
length in plants adapted to survive in colder extreme latitudes with very brief growing seasons.
These can commence flowering within days of germination, irrespective of the day length. The
oilseed variety FIN-314, is an early cultivated example. This is derived from Russian accessions
k-313 and k-315 from the Vavilov Institute. Adapted to growing in Finland, during extremely
short summers, FIN-314 begins flowering within 3 weeks of germination, irrespective of day
length (Grigoryev 1998). In around 2004, a recreational cannabis variety called Lowryder
arrived in Europe. This demonstrated the same early-flowering trait (Rosenthal 2004, p. 80).
This variety is very short, has a lower THC content than most recreational varieties, and is not
high yielding. In addition, it is also almost impossible to duplicate it through cuttings (clones).
However, it can be grown in confined spaces without the need for artificial day-length control.
Several crops can be grown outdoors each year. A large number of so-called auto-flowering
varieties are now entering the market, with much improved yields and increased THC content.
Their impact on the seed market, and on organized illicit cannabis production, is yet to be seen
but is potentially profound. They may influence the breeding of cannabis for pharmaceutical
purposes.
Whereas conventional indoor varieties produce about 500 g m−2 of floral material (dry weight),
commercially available auto-flowering varieties tested in growth rooms at GW Pharmaceuticals
have routinely yielded 1100 g m−2 of combined flower and leaf material. Of this, 770 g m−2 was
foliar material, containing 13% THC. The time taken from the transplanting of a small seedling
to the harvesting of a fully mature plant is just 10 weeks. By flowering in a 24 h day length, as
opposed to the conventional day, these plants receive twice as much light energy per day. Yields
of floral material, produced by auto-flowering plants in continuous lighting, have been seen to
equate to approximately 1 g per kW h of energy, consumed by the lighting system. This is the
same as that typically achieved by conventional plants flowering in 12 h days. However, because
of the more compact growing operation, less expenditure is required for heating and ventilation,
making the economics of such plants increasingly attractive.

Cannabis Horticulture

4.6.2.8 Setting the growing temperature

Photosynthesis and resultant growth is markedly affected by temperature. Cannabis varieties
originating from different agro-climatic zones worldwide vary in their optimum temperature,
ranging between 25°C and 35°C (Chandra et al. 2011). GW Pharmaceutical crops are generally grown at a controlled daily average temperature of 25°C. This temperature was considered
the maximum possible while maintaining acceptable staff welfare. It also took into account the
potential effect of warmer temperatures on the growth of insect pests and spider mites. Raising
the growing temperature by 3°C is reported to halve the time for such pests as spider mites to
complete their life cycle (McPartland et al. 2000, pp. 93–95).
Cooling a large glasshouse in summer requires carefully managed ventilation and shading.
Growers can take some delight in the knowledge that the plants themselves make a substantial
contribution. Just as in animal perspiration, when plants lose water to the surrounding atmosphere through the foliage (transpiration), the conversion of water from liquid to vapor is endothermic. The absorption of latent heat cools the surroundings.
4.6.2.9 Biocontrol

The application of pesticides to pharmaceutical crops is normal practice. However, Good
Agricultural and Collection Practice (GACP) guidelines dictate that they should be avoided
wherever possible. If absolutely necessary, they should be applied at the minimum effective
level in accordance with recommendation of the manufacturers and authorities (EMA 2006,
paragraph 9.3.2). If applied, stringent tests would be required to ensure that they did not leave
an unacceptable residual presence in the final medicine.
GW Pharmaceuticals has avoided the application of pesticides. Disease and insect pest control
is achieved by the dual approach of prevention and cure. In addition to controlling the temperature, humidity levels are managed where possible, to avoid extreme conditions. Very high humidity encourages fungi, while extreme arid conditions favor spider mite infestation, so a middle path
is walked. Insect and mite infestations are controlled by the introduction of beneficial insects,
which predate or parasitize the intruders.
4.6.2.10 Growth medium

Cannabis grown in the UK for pharmaceutical purposes is propagated in individual pots of a
peat and perlite-based growth medium (Potter 2009). The bulk of seized illicit crops within
Northern Europe are also found in a similar medium. Peat is widely used in horticulture, due to
an unequalled range of favorable characteristics. Peat is naturally free from pests, diseases, and
weeds. It has good water and air retention capabilities and it readily allows root penetration. The
use of peat is widely criticized as being unfavorable to the environment. Natural renewal of peat
is a very slow process. In anaerobic bog habitats, peat locks up carbon dioxide, but this is released
to the atmosphere once peat is aerated in a horticultural setting. However, commercial growers of
many crops contest that peat is the only suitable medium for reliable production of high-quality,
reproducible plants. Although many cannabis varieties are easy-going, others are more exacting
and show a clear preference for peat. Ongoing research is evaluating alternative media.
The production of cannabis has in the past been commonly associated with hydroponic
(soil-free) growing systems, a perception being held that this produces more potent cannabis.
Hydroponic systems are expensive and complicated to install. They do prevent the accumulation of
used soil and peat, which aid the detection of illicit cannabis growing. However, some hydroponic
systems still generate large quantities of fiberglass or other waste materials. Evidence suggests that
yields and potency are not improved by hydroponic growing (UNODC 2006; Vanhove et al. 2012).

81

82

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

4.6.2.11 Plant nutrition

Cannabis requires a large number of inorganic nutrients to support growth. These are commonly
divided into the macronutrients (nitrogen, potassium, phosphate, magnesium, calcium, and sulfur) which are required in relatively large quantities, and a range of similarly important but less
heavily consumed micronutrients (McPartland et al. 2000). Once the minimum required dose
of a nutrient has been made available to the plant, further additions will initially have minimal
effect on plant development. However, a point is reached, the critical toxicity content, at which
the nutrient reaches toxic levels. There is typically a very wide difference between the critical deficiency and the critical toxicity levels. Therefore, it is possible for large variations in nutrient content to occur with no serious penalty on plant growth, and this allows the grower a large degree of
flexibility. As the plant depletes the nutrient content of the growth medium, appropriate feeding
may be necessary to avoid deficiencies occurring.
Cannabis sativa L. has been planted by humans for thousands of years. Cultivated plants have
generally been selected for desirable agricultural traits in soils with high fertility, where the availability of major nutrients is typically at least two orders of magnitude greater than those occupied
by wild plants (Evans 1975). Cultivated plants generally respond most rapidly to increases in soil
nutrients. Of these nutrients, nitrogen alters plant composition more than any other mineral
nutrient (Marschner 2002). The nitrogen content of the growing medium therefore needs to
be controlled with especial care. GW Pharmaceuticals generally maintains acceptable growth
medium nutrition by incorporating a controlled release fertilizer that slowly releases nitrogen and
other nutrients throughout the plant’s life.
The degree to which soil nutrition affects the secondary metabolite content of plant material
is majorly governed by whether or not the metabolite contains nitrogen. Plants have evolved to
produce secondary metabolites by three main biosynthetic routes, i.e., the terpenoid, phenolic,
and nitrogen pathways. Photosynthesis normally ensures a more than adequate supply of precursors for carbon compounds, such as the terpenoids and phenolics. By contrast, nitrogen uptake
by the plant is limited, and the enzymes synthesizing secondary metabolites containing nitrogen
(e.g., alkaloids) will compete with those requiring nitrogen for protein synthesis. The cost of the
secondary metabolite has to be balanced against the cost of new plant growth. As expressed by
Herms and Mattson (1992), the plant has a dilemma, whether to grow or to defend. The nitrogen
pathway leads to nitrogen-containing secondary metabolites, such as the alkaloids (e.g., nicotine),
cyanogens, mustard oils, and nonprotein amino acids (Harborne 1993, pp. 73–78). The quantity
of this type of metabolite is affected by the quantity of nitrogen in the growth medium, or made
available via nitrogen fixation. In a plant such as tobacco (Nicotiana spp.), which produces two
types of trichome on the same plant—producing nitrogen-based nicotine or carbon-based phenylpropanoids—growth medium nitrogen content and/or photosynthetic rate will affect the ratio
of these two compounds (Fritz et al. 2006).
Cannabis only produces carbon-based secondary metabolites. Of these the monoterpenes, and
sesquiterpenes are made via the terpenoid route, while the flavonoids are made via the phenolic
route. The cannabinoids are made from moieties derived from both routes. In marked contrast
to a plant like tobacco, photosynthesis is normally able to supply enough carbon for secondary
metabolite biosynthesis. The secondary metabolite profile of a plant like tobacco is thus sensitive
to growing conditions, while cannabis is conveniently less so.
4.6.2.12 Harvest and drying

Once the crop is harvested, prompt drying is essential as a moist crop is vulnerable to fungal or
bacterial spoilage. Numerous recommendations within the gray literature encourage a period of

Cannabis Horticulture

slow drying, or “curing.” This is suggested to bring about a reduction in starch, sugar, and chlorophyll and a resultant improvement in flavor. In a pharmaceutical crop, emphasis centers on the
secondary metabolite content and taste is less of a consideration.
The propagation and harvest process in summarized as a flow chart in Fig. 4.8.
4.6.2.13 Processing

Once harvested, it is a widespread cultural practice to remove (manicure) and discard the leaves
and outer bract tissue, to leave the resinous floral tissue only. When producing cannabis as a
feedstock for the manufacture of medicines, GW Pharmaceutical staff strip the flowers and
leaves from the stem. The stems are discarded but the retained mixture of floral and foliar tissues
constitutes their standardized BRM. The retained material is closely examined. Any substantial
stem material is removed, as are any other potential contaminants, e.g., biocontrol packaging.
This whole process is sometimes referred to as garbling. The material is then stored in a holding
area with closely monitored temperature and humidity levels prior to onward processing. The
stems, along with all plant waste from the glasshouse, are composted and used elsewhere as a soil
conditioner.
4.6.3 Sativex® BRM quality control

As emphasized earlier, the feedstock for Sativex® is a BRM containing both floral and foliar material. The floral tissue is abundantly covered in capitate stalked trichomes, but these are absent on
foliage. The more diminutive sessile trichomes on foliage produce a slightly different secondary
metabolite profile. Any alterations to growing conditions that majorly affect the foliage to floral

Seed accessions acquired
Seeds germinated
Best candidates selected
Mother plants raised
Branches removed and cuttings produced
Cuttings rooted14 days in rooting plug—25°C, 24-hour day length, high humidity
Rooted cuttings—potted up in growth medium
Vegetative growth period—3 weeks, 24-hour day length, 25°C
Thigmomorphogenesis (optional)—young plants brushed flat daily to reduce height
Flower formation and maturation—8 weeks, 12-hour day length, 25°C
Harvest—whole plant cut at base
Drying—plants hung in dry ventilated area in darkness 25°−30°C, 1 week
Stripping— flowers and leaves stripped from stem
BRM inspection and garbling—stem fragments and contaminants removed

Fig. 4.8 Flow chart. Selection and propagation of high-quality plant material: the essential steps.

83

84

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

tissue ratio have the potential to alter the overall chemical content of the BRM. Guarding against
this possibility, each batch of BRM is analyzed for its chemical content. The material is rejected if
the analyses are not within agreed acceptance levels. A much more detailed analysis is performed
on the BDS (botanical drug substance) made from this material.
4.6.4 Sativex® BDS manufacture

To produce a cannabis extract, batches of dried plant material are immersed in liquid carbon
dioxide at extremely high pressure. The ingredients dissolving in this solvent are then separated
and purified.
Sativex® is formulated by incorporating BDSs containing THC and CBD in an accurately measured ratio. The only incipients are ethanol, propylene glycol and peppermint oil, the latter being
added to improve palatability. By blending two BDSs, a uniform THC:CBD ratio is assured.

4.7 Future research
This chapter has described how alterations to growing conditions and timings affect the cannabis
plant, and the secondary metabolites produced within it. To grow cannabis in a glasshouse, for
the production of a botanical medicine, it is vitally important that uniformly favorable conditions
are maintained for 12 months a year. Cannabis yields are highly affected by temperature and light
conditions, and keeping these parameters uniform throughout the year is especially challenging. The energy consumption required is possibly higher than in any other UK glasshouse crop.
Ongoing research at GW Pharmaceuticals is further investigating how to maintain high yields,
while reducing the environmental impact.
As potential new cannabinoid-based medicines are identified, new chemotypes are steadily
arriving in the glasshouse and the growing requirements of each are ascertained.
This chapter emphasized the fundamental importance of the glandular trichome on Cannabis
sativa L. By sieving cannabis material, preparations have been made that consist almost exclusively of detached trichome resin heads, a single specimen of which is shown in Fig. 4.2D. These
have contained up to 67% THC. Such cannabinoid enriched trichome preparations may prove a
useful alternative starter material to BRM for the future production of BDSs.

References
Albuisson, M., Lefevre, M., and Wald, L. (2006). Averaged Solar Radiation 1990–2004. Paris: Ecole des
Mines de Paris/Armines. Available at: http://www.soda-is.com/eng/map/index.html#monde (accessed
March 21, 2008).
Anathakrishnan, T.N. (1993). Bionomics of thrips. Annual Review of Entomology, 38, 71–92.
BBC. (2012). Cannabis Farms’ £200m Stolen Electricity Cost ‘Staggering’. [Online] Available at: http://www.
bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-tyne-17898587 (accessed August 14, 2013).
Bohlmann, F. and Hoffmann, E. (1979). Cannabigerol-ähnliche Verbindungen aus Helichrysum umbraculigerum. Phytochemistry, 18, 1371–1374.
Bouquet, R. (1950). Cannabis. Bulletin on Narcotics, 4, 14–30 Available at: http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/
data-and-analysis/bulletin/bulletin_1950-01-01_4_page003.html.
Briosi, G. and Tognini, F. (1894). Intorna alla anatomia deila canapa Cannabis sativa L. Parte prima:
Organi sessuali. Atti 1st Bot. Pavia, 2(3), 91–209.
Byers, J.A. (2005). The cost of alarm pheromone production in cotton aphids, Aphis gossypii.
Naturwissenschaften, 92, 69–72.

Cannabis Horticulture

Caldwell, M.M., Robberecht, R., and Flint, S.D. (1983). Internal filters: prospects for UV-acclimation in
higher plants. Physiologia Plantarum, 58, 445–450.
Callaway, J.C. and Laakkonen, T.T. (1996). Cultivation of Cannabis oil seed varieties in Finland. Journal of
the International Hemp Association, 3(1), 32–34.
Chandra, S., Lata, H., Khan, I.A., and ElSohly, M.A. (2008), Photosynthetic response of Cannabis sativa
L. to variations in photosynthetic photon flux densities, temperature and CO2 conditions. Physiology
and Molecular Biology of Plants 14, 299–306.
Chandra, S., Lata, H., Khan, I.A., and ElSohly, M.A. (2011). Temperature response of photosynthesis in
different drug and fiber varieties of Cannabis sativa L. Physiology and Molecular Biology of Plants, 17,
297–303.
Clarke, R.C. (1981). Marijuana Botany. San Francisco, CA: Ronin Publishing.
Croteau, R. and Johnson, M.A. (1984). Biosynthesis of terpenoids in glandular trichomes. In: E.P.
Rodriguez, L. Healey, and I. Mehta (eds.). Biology and Chemistry of Plant Trichomes. London: Plenum
Press, pp. 133–185.
Darwin, C. (1859). On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured
Races in the Struggle for Life. Chapter IV, para 1. Available at: http://darwin-online.org.uk/contents.
html#books.
Dayanandan, P. and Kaufman, P.B. (1976). Trichomes in Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae). American
Journal of Botany, 63(5), 578–591.
de Backer, B.B., Maebe, K.K., Verstraete, A.G., and Charlier, C.C. (2012). Evolution of the content of
THC and other major cannabinoids in drug-type cannabis cuttings and seedlings during growth of
plants. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 57(4), 918–922.
de Bunge, A. (1860). Lettre de M. Alex. de Bunge à M. Decaisne. Botanique de France, 7, 29.
de Meijer, E.P.M. and Hammond, K.H. (2005). The inheritance of chemical phenotype in Cannabis sativa
L. (II): Cannabigerol predominant plants. Euphytica, 145, 189–198.
de Meijer, E.P.M. and Keizer, L.C.P. (1994). Variation of Cannabis for phenological development and stem
elongation in relation to stem production. Field Crops Research 38, 37–46.
Dell, B. and McComb, A.J. (1978). Plant Resins – Their Formation, Secretion and Possible Functions.
Advances in Botanical Research. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Ehleringer, J. (1984). Ecology and ecophysiology of leaf pubescence in North American desert plants. In:
E. Rodriguez, P.L. Healey, and I. Mehta (eds.). Biology and Chemistry of Plant Trichomes. New York:
Plenum Press, pp. 113–132.
EMA (European Medicines Agency), Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products. (2006). Guideline on Good
Agricultural and Collection Practice (GACP) for Starting Materials of Herbal Origin. Available at: http://
www.ema.europa.eu/ema/pages/includes/document/open_document.jsp?webContentId=WC500003362
(accessed March 17, 2013).
Emboden, W.A. (1974). Cannabis – a polytypic genus. Economic Botany, 28(3), 304–310.
EMCDDA (European Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction). (2004). An Overview of Cannabis
Potency in Europe. EMCDDA Insights, no. 6. Lisbon: EMCDDA.
EMCDDA. (2012). Cannabis Production and Markets in Europe. EMCDDA Insights, no. 12. Lisbon: EMCDDA.
EUROPAM. (2008). Guidelines for Good Wild Crafting Practice (GWP) of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants.
Available at: http://bpa.peru-v.com/documentos/Europam_GWP_Medicinal_Aromatic.pdf (accessed
September 3, 2013).
Evans, L.T. (1975). The physiological basis of crop yield. In: L.T. Evans (ed.). Crop Physiology. London:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 327–355.
Fairbairn, J.W. (1972). The trichomes and glands of Cannabis sativa L. Bulletin on Narcotics, 24(4), 29–33.
Fritschi, G., Klein, B., and Szilluweit, W. (2006). Verteilung der THC-Gehalte in Marihuanapflanzen:
Bestimmung der Gehalte in Wurzeln, Stängeln, Blättern und Blüten. Toxichem+Krimtech, 73(2), 54–56.

85

86

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Fritz, C., Palacios-Rojas N., Feil, R., and Stitt, M. (2006). Regulation of secondary metabolism by the
carbon–­nitrogen status in tobacco: nitrate inhibits large sectors of phenylpropanoid metabolism. The
Plant Journal, 46, 533–548.
Gershenzon, J. (1994). Metabolic costs of terpenoid accumulation in higher plants. Journal of Chemical
Ecology, 20 (6), 1281–1328.
Grigoryev, S. (1998). Hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) genetic resources at the VIR: from the collection of seeds,
through to the collection of sources, towards the collection of donors of traits. The history of cultivation
of hemp in Russia. Online publications, N.I. Vavilov Research Institute of Plant Industry. Available at:
http://www.vir.nw.ru/hemp/hemp1.htm (accessed on August 19, 2011).
Halliday, K.J. and Fankauser, C. (2003). Phytochrome-hormonal signalling networks. New Phytologist,
157, 449–463.
Harborne, J.B. (1993). Introduction to Ecological Biochemistry. 4th ed. London: Academic Press.
Herms, D.A. and Mattson, W.J. (1992). The dilemma of plants: to grow or defend. The Quarterly Review of
Biology, 67(3), 283–335.
Heuvelinke, E., Batta, L.G.G., and Daqmen, T.H.J. (1995). Transmission of solar radiation by a multispan
Venlo-type glasshouse: validation of a model. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 74(1–2), 41–59.
Hooke, R. (1665). Micrographia or Some Physiological Description of Minute Bodies Made by Magnifying
Glasses with Observations and Enquiries Thereon. Available at: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/15491.
Jansen, M. and Terris, R. (2002). One woman’s work in the use of hashish in a medical context. In:
E. Russo, M. Dreher, and M.L. Mathre (eds.). Women and Cannabis, Medicine, Science and Technology.
New York: Haworth Press, pp. 135–143.
Kowalski, S.P., Eannetta, N.T., Hirzel, A.T., and Steffens J.C. (1992) Purification and characterization of
polyphenol oxidase from glandular trichomes of Solanum berthaultii. Plant Physiology, 100, 677–684.
Krings, M., Kellog, D., Derek, W., Kerp, H., and Taylor, T.N. (2003). Trichomes of the seed fern
Blanzyopteris praedentata: implications for plant-insect interactions in the Late Carboniferous. Botanical
Journal of the Linnean Society, 141(2), 133–149.
Langton, F.A, Fuller, D.P., and Abbott, J.D. (2001). Supplementary Lighting of Pot Chrysanthemums – A
Grower Guide. Final report of Horticultural Development Council. PC 92e. East Malling: Horticultural
Development Council.
Leggett, T. (2006). A review of the world cannabis situation. Bulletin of Narcotics, 58, 1–36.
Mahlberg, P.G., Hammond, C.T., Turner, J.C., and Hemphill, J.K. (1984). Structure, development and
composition of glandular trichomes of Cannabis sativa L. In: E.O. Rodriguez, L. Healey, and I. Mehta
(eds.). Biology and Chemistry of Plant Trichomes. London: Plenum Press, pp. 23–51.
Malingré, T., Herndriks, H., Battermann, S., Bos, R., and Visser, J. (1975). The essential oil of Cannabis
sativa L. Planta Medica, 28, 56–61.
Marschner, H. (2002). Nitrogen supply, plant growth and plant composition. In: Mineral Nutrition in
Higher Plants. London: Academic Press, pp. 250–254.
McPartland, J.M., Clarke, R.C., and Watson, D.P. (2000). Hemp Diseases and Pests Management and
Biological Control. Oxford: CABI Publishing.
Mechoulam, R. (1986). The pharmacohistory of Cannabis sativa. In: R. Mechoulam (ed.). Cannabinoids as
Therapeutics Agents. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 1–19.
Mediavilla, V. and Steinemann, S. (1997). Essential oil of Cannabis sativa L. strains. Journal of the
International Hemp Association, 4, 80–82.
Neve, R.A. (1991). Hops. London: Chapman and Hall.
Payne, W.W. (1978). A glossary of plant hair technology. Brittonia, 30, 239–255.
Pliny. (c.60ad). Natural History. Vol. 6. Translated by W.H.S. Jones (1951). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Cannabis Horticulture

Potter, D.J. (2004). Growth and morphology of medicinal cannabis. In: G.W. Guy, B.A. Whittle, and P.J.
Robson (eds.). The Medicinal Uses of Cannabis and Cannabinoids. London: Pharmaceutical Press, pp.
17–54.
Potter, D.J. (2009). The Propagation, Characterisation and Optimisation of Cannabis as a
Phytopharmaceutical. PhD thesis, Kings College London. Available at: http://www.gwpharm.com/
uploads/finalfullthesisdjpotter.pdf (accessed May 21, 2014).
Potter, D.J. (2013). A review of the cultivation and processing of cannabis Cannabis sativa L. for production
of prescription medicines in the UK. Drug Testing and Analysis, 6, 31–38.
Potter, D.J. and Duncombe, P. (2012). The effect of electrical lighting power and irradiance on indoorgrown cannabis potency and yield. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 57, 618–622.
Roberecht, R. and Caldwell, M.M. (1980). Leaf ultraviolet optical properties along a latitudinal gradient in
the arctic-alpine life zone. Ecology, 61, 612–619.
Rhodes, D.F. (1977). Integrated antiherbivore, antidesiccant, and ultraviolet screening properties of creosote bush resin. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology, 5, 281–290.
Rosenthal, E. (2004). The Big Book of Buds. Vol. 2. Oakland, CA: Quick American Archives.
Russo, E.B. (2004). History of cannabis as a medicine. In: G.W. Guy, B.A. Whittle, and P.J. Robson (eds.).
The Medicinal Uses of Cannabis and Cannabinoids. London: Pharmaceutical Press, pp. 1–16.
Russo, E.B. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage
effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1344–1364.
Shade, R.R., Thompson, T.E., and Campbell, W.R. (1975). An alfalfa weevil larval resistance mechanism
detected in Medicago. Journal of Economic Entomology, 68, 399–404.
Sirikantaramas, S., Taura, F., Tanaka, F., Ishikawa, Y., Morimoto, S., and Shoyama, S. (2005).
Tetrahydrocannabinolic acid synthase, the enzyme controlling marijuana psychoactivity is secreted into
the storage cavity of the glandular trichomes. Plant & Cell Physiology, 46(9), 1578–1582.
Small, E. and Beckstead, H.D. (1973a). Common cannabinoid phenotypes in 350 stocks of Cannabis.
Lloydia, 36, 144–165.
Small, E. and Beckstead, H.D. (1973b). Cannabinoid phenotypes in Cannabis sativa L. Nature, 245, 147–
148.
Small, E. and Cronquist, A. (1976). A practical and natural taxonomy for cannabis. Taxon, 25, 405–435.
Toonen, M., Ribot, S., and Thissen, J. (2006). Yield of illicit indoor cannabis cultivation in the Netherlands.
Journal of Forensic Science, 51, 1050–1054.
Tooker, J.F., Peiffer, M., Luthe, D.S., and Felton, G.W. (2010). Trichomes as sensors: detecting activity on
the leaf surface. Plant Signaling & Behavior, 5, 73–75.
Turner, A.E., El Sohly, M.A., and Boeren, E.G. (1980). Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. XV11. A review
of the natural constituents. Journal of Natural Products, 43, 169–233.
UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). (2006). Cannabis: why we should care. In: World
Drug Report 2006. Vienna: UNODC, pp. 188–189. Available at: http://www.unodc.org/pdf/WDR_2006/
wdr2006_chap2_why.pdf (accessed July 30, 2007).
UNODC. (2008). World Drug Report 2008. Vienna: UNODC. Available at: http://www.unodc.org/documents/
wdr/WDR_2008/WDR_2008_eng_web.pdf (accessed August 15, 2013).
UNODC. (2009a). Recommended Methods for the Identification and Analysis of Cannabis and Cannabis
Products. Manual for Use by National Drug Analysis Laboratories, Laboratory and Scientific Section
– UNODC. Vienna: UNODC. Available at: http://www.unodc.org/documents/scientific/ST-NAR-40Ebook.pdf (accessed August 15, 2013).
UNODC. (2009b). World Drug Report 2009. New York: United Nations Publications. Available online
at: http://www.unodc.org/documents/wdr/WDR_2009/WDR2009_eng_web.pdf (accessed August
15, 2013).

87

88

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Vanhove, W., Surmont, T., Van Damme, P., and De Ruyver, B. (2012). Yield and turnover of illicit indoor
cannabis (Cannabis spp.) plantations in Belgium. Forensic Science International, 220, 265–270.
Vanhove, W., Van Damme, P., and Meert, N. (2011). Factors determining yield and quality of illicit indoor
cannabis (Cannabis spp.) production. Forensic Science International, 212, 158–163.
Wagner, G.J., Wang, E., and Shepherd, W. (2004). New approaches for studying and exploiting an old protuberance, the plant trichome. Annals of Botany, 93, 3–11.
Walters, D.S., Harman, J., Craig, R., AND Mumma, R.O. (1991). Effect of temperature on glandular trichome exudate composition and pest resistance in geraniums. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata,
60, 61–69.
Werker, E. (2000). Trichome diversity and development. In: D.L. Hallahan, J.C. Gray, and J.A. Callow (eds.).
Advances in Botanical Research incorporating Advances in Plant Pathology Plant Trichomes. Vol. 31.
London: Academic Press, pp. 1–35.
Williamson, E.M. (2001). Synergy and other interactions in phytomedicines. Phytomedicine, 8(5), 401–409.

Chapter 5

The Chemical Phenotypes (Chemotypes)
of Cannabis
Etienne de Meijer

5.1 Introduction
Cannabinoids belong to a class of terpenophenolic compounds that, with some reported exceptions in the plant kingdom (Bohlmann and Hoffmann 1979; Raederstorff et al. 2012; Toyota
et al. 1994, 2002), is largely unique to the genus Cannabis. In a review, ElSohly and Slade (2005)
estimated the total number of cannabinoids at 70, but this number is dynamic and subject to definitions and limitations. Since then, ElSohly’s group has added about 35 new cannabinoid terpene
esters, cannabigerol-, and cannabichromanone-related substances. In the GW Pharmaceuticals
(GW) laboratories, a range of fatty acid esters, cannabitriol esters, cannabitriol ethers, terpene
esters, dimers and prenylated products of cannabinoids have been identified. These, with the
proven and expected existence of several cannabinoid alkyl homologues, would bring the total
number of cannabinoid-related compounds significantly in excess of 130 (A. Sutton, personal
communication). Only a few of them are considered major, in the sense that they commonly
occupy substantial proportions of a plant’s total cannabinoid fraction. The large majority of the
cannabinoids occur in trace proportions. Many of them appear to, or are expected to, induce
specific physiological effects in mammals and are therefore of potential pharmaceutical interest.
Pharmaceutical research, and product development especially, requires an ample availability of
the compounds of interest. Economic and efficient horticultural production of cannabinoids is
realized by the cultivation of uniform female crops with high yields of botanical raw material
(BRM, the combined fraction of stem leaves and floral bracts and bracteoles), high cannabinoid
content, and well-defined cannabinoid profiles that are strongly dominated by a single compound. These criteria provide the rationale and targets for a medicinal Cannabis breeding program. The economic production of the naturally minor cannabinoids particularly would not have
been possible without committed breeding work. The focus of this chapter is on the currently
available range of chemotypes, as expressed by selected female clones obtained through conventional breeding methods. These are discussed in terms of underlying genotype, breeding history,
production level, and, in some instances, highly characteristic trichome morphology. A genetic
model for chemotype inheritance is presented. Finally, the increasing molecular biological interest in Cannabis is addressed as this development may result in advanced breeding approaches,
novel cannabinoid variants, and chemotypes beyond the current range.

5.2 Chemical phenotype and Cannabis classification
The genus Cannabis L. is unambiguously recognizable by botanical criteria. Within the genus, the
variability of chemotypical and other characteristics is impressive and there is a long history of

90

Constituents, History, International Control, Cultivation, and Phenotypes of Cannabis

taxonomic controversy on the number of species to be recognized. Cannabinoids belong to the
more conspicuous and spectacular attributes of the genus and cannabinoid chemotypes have been
employed to classify groups within the genus, both casually and in formal taxonomy. Informally
many authors refer to plants with high tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) content and low cannabidiol
(CBD) content as “drug-type” and those with low THC content and high CBD content as “fibertype” (e.g., Kojoma et al. 2006; Lydon and Teramura 1987). Although this may sound logical, such
terminology is problematic. There are no strict natural relationships between fiber characteristics and
cannabinoid content or – composition; only artificial associations for which exceptions occur (de
Meijer and Keizer 1996).
Small and Cronquist (1976) attributed taxonomic importance to chemotype and used the
THC:CBD ratio as a criterion to discriminate within the single species C. sativa L., two subspecies sativa and indica and, per subspecies, two varieties: one domesticated and one wild. Hillig
and Mahlberg (2004) discriminated C. sativa and C. indica as separate species. However, their
definitions of the categories sativa and indica deviate significantly from Small’s and other (e.g.,
Anderson 1980; Schultes et al. 1974) taxonomic systems. They used chemotype-related criteria
such as the BT- and BD allele frequency (encoding tetrahydrocannabinolic acid and cannabidiolic
acid synthase, respectively), THC content, and the level of propyl cannabinoids. The great difficulty with such criteria is that they have, directly or indirectly, been subjected to human selection
for ages. Furthermore, cannabinoid ratios are governed by simple genetic mechanisms and in
segregating populations, or even in single plant progenies, morphologically similar (sister) plants
can be found with strongly contrasting chemotypes. This makes the cannabinoid chemotype
unsuitable as a taxonomic criterion.
Agreement on Cannabis taxonomy has never been reached and none of the proposed systems
appears practically applicable as, under investigation, actual plants usually end up as “intermediate” between categories. A monospecific concept, with no further subspecific division, has
implicitly been adopted in virtually all, nontaxonomic, publications on Cannabis. Also, in this
author’s opinion, the genus should be considered as monospecific, i.e., comprising only the single
species C. sativa L. The reasons for this view are simple. All groups of plants belonging to the
genus are perfectly interfertile and the morphological diversity within the genus shows a diffuse
and continuous pattern. Hence, neither biological nor morphological criteria are available for
the discrimination of more than one species. However, the issue remains of how to adequately
indicate the different groups of plants within this single species. The current pattern of Cannabis
diversity is primarily due to intentional actions of humans and reflects a long, intense, and divergent process of domestication which has blurred any natural evolutionary pattern of diversity. It is
even questionable if truly wild Cannabis still exists, therefore a characterization of groups within
the genus/species in nontaxonomic terms appears most appropriate. For instance, groups could
be defined by their type of utilization: (“crop-use groups”: fiber hemp, drug strains, seed hemp),
their (usually secondary) geographic provenance, their domestication status [landraces (locally
adapted, traditional varieties), cultivars of diverse nature, weedy escapes] and key agronomic
features (chemotype, fiber content, etc.). Without any formal taxonomic intention, this provides
a coherent idea of a group phenotype, a complex of commonly associated features resulting from
domestication. To avoid taxonomic impasse and confusion, the use of “cultonomic” rather than
natural taxonomic criteria has been recommended for domesticated plants in general (van den
Berg 1999, 2004). Cultonomic classification has been formalized in the International Code of
Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP, Brickell et al. 2004) and provides two categories,
“Group” and “cultivar.” The Group is a category for assembling cultivars on the basis of some
defined similarity and, along with other users’ criteria, chemotype would be a suitable attribute to

THE CHEMICAL PHENOTYPES (CHEMOTYPES) OF CANNABIS

specify Groups. The implementation of a system according to the ICNCP would be useful to all
who need to refer to Cannabis plant materials.

5.3 Defining chemotype
5.3.1 Components of chemotype

For a systematic approach, it is important to discriminate qualitative and quantitative aspects of
chemotype. The cannabinoid composition, i.e., the mutual ratio of the different cannabinoids,
represents the qualitative chemotype and is generally controlled by simple genetic mechanisms,
shows discrete distribution patterns in progenies and populations, and is hardly affected by the
environment (de Meijer et al. 2003). The quantitative aspects of chemotype are controlled by different, polygenic mechanisms, show Gaussian distributions in progenies and populations, and are
greatly affected by environmental factors. The yield of a certain cannabinoid in a horticultural
production system can be considered as a complex characteristic composed of four components:

A
25

No. of individuals

20
15
10
5
0

0

10

30
40
20
Total cannabinoid content (%w/w)

−2.0

−1.5
−1.0 −0.5
0.0
10 Log [CBD]/[THC]

50

B
35

No. of individuals

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

−3.0

−2.5

0.5

1.0

1.5

Fig. 5.1 The Gaussian distribution of the polygenic trait total cannabinoid content (A) and the discrete distribution of the monogenic trait cannabinoid profile (log [CBD]/[THC]) (B), in a segregating
progeny of 130 sister-individuals.

91

92

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

the total above ground dry matter yield, the proportion of BRM (leaf and inflorescence), the
total cannabinoid content in the homogenized BRM, and the proportion (purity) of the target
­cannabinoid in the total cannabinoid fraction. The first three components are quantitative in
nature. The purity, or the mutual ratio of cannabinoids, has generally a monogenic background.
Fig. 5.1 shows the differences in distribution patterns of the polygenic trait total cannabinoid content and the monogenic trait cannabinoid composition. For male and female Cannabis plants, the
same principles for chemotype inheritance apply and the cannabinoid compositions (ratios) are
similarly expressed. However, the dry matter yields, the BRM proportions, and the total cannabinoid contents reach lower values for the males than for the females. This is due to the typical male
morphology: fewer floral bracts and bracteoles that carry the trichomes where the cannabinoid
production takes place. Data presented in this chapter relate to mature female plants.
5.3.2 Production procedures and conditions

The plasticity of the quantitative components of chemotype requires some specification of the
production environment. Data referred to in this chapter (e.g., Table 5.1) are based on the procedures and conditions in the GW glasshouse. For propagation of the production clones, shoot-­
cuttings are taken from mother plants. These are treated with a rooting hormone and incubated
for 2 weeks under permanent light. Then, cuttings are transplanted to 5 L pots of compost and kept
under permanent light (80 W/m2 photosynthetically active radiation (PAR)) for a 3-week period
of vegetative development. Crops are then spaced to 10 plants/m2 under a 12 h photoperiod for
flower induction, flowering, and maturation for a further 8–9 weeks. The average light intensity
at crop level in the winter period is around 400 and in the summer period around 600 µmol.m−2.
s−1 (c.80 and 120 W/m2 PAR, respectively). Temperature is kept at 25°C throughout the growing
period. The compost used is an adjusted Begonia growth mix with a neutral pH. The structure is

Table 5.1 Achieved production levels of current clones representing nine different chemotypes.
BRM indicates the total dry yield of leaf and floral tissue at maturity; Ctot is the total cannabinoid
content in the BRM; purity is the proportion of the target cannabinoid in the total cannabinoid fraction; yield is the resulting quantity of the target cannabinoid produced. Performance of the propyl
cannabinoid clones is still suboptimal and breeding aimed at yield improvement ongoing
Chemotype
(main cannabinoid)

Clone
(code)

BRM
(g/m2)

Ctot
(%w/w)

Target cannabinoid
Purity
(%w/w)

Yield
(g/m2)

CBG

M378

792

11.2

99.9

89

CBGV

M350

507

10.4

87.4

46

THC

M87

650

15.3

96.8

96

THCV

M264

609

14.5

81.7

72

CBD

M255

810

14.5

88.7

104

CBDV

M276

475

9.5

71.0

32

CBC

M394

731

2.9

93.4

20

CBCV

M206

283

1.8

52.6

3

Cannabinoid-free

M299

620

0.0

THE CHEMICAL PHENOTYPES (CHEMOTYPES) OF CANNABIS

medium-coarse with added perlite for aeration and free draining. After the generative period the
above-ground plant material is collected, air dried, and the BRM separated from the stems and
branches. Total cannabinoid contents (% w/w) are determined for the dry, homogenized (milled)
BRM fraction. Compositions (ratios) and purities are expressed as the weight proportions (%
w/w) of the individual cannabinoids in the total cannabinoid fraction.

5.4 Genetic determination of chemotype
5.4.1 Cannabinoid biogenesis

Cannabinoids are terpenophenolic products. The monoterpenoid precursors, predominantly
geranylpyrophosphate (GPP) and to a lesser extent nerylpyrophosphate (NPP), originate from
the deoxyxylulose (DOX) pathway (Fellermeier et al. 2001). The phenolic precursors (5-n-alkylresorcinolic acid homologues) are generated by the polyketide pathway (Raharjo et al. 2004). In
the cannabinoid polyketide pathway, acyl-activating enzyme-1 (AAE1; Stout et al. 2012) binds
coenzyme A (CoA) to different short-chain fatty acids. The most common phenolic precursor,
5-n-pentyl-resorcinolic acid (olivetolic acid, OA) results from the condensation of n-hexanoylCoA with three molecules of malonyl-CoA. In a two-step reaction, first a tetraketide intermediate is formed by olivetol synthase (OLS; sequenced by Taura et al. 2009), recently renamed
as tetraketide synthase (TKS; Gagne et al. 2012). Subsequently, the tetraketide intermediate is
cyclisized by the recently identified olivetolic acid cyclase (OAC; Gagne et al. 2012). Also the
less common 5-n-propyl-resorcinolic acid homologue (divarinolic acid, DA) can be formed
from n-butanoyl-CoA and three molecules of malonyl-CoA, probably by the same promiscuous
enzyme system. Other resorcinolic acid alkyl homologues from C1 through to C7 are produced in
minute ­quantities.
The phenolic and terpenoid moieties are subsequently condensed into terpenophenolics (cannabinoid acids) by the prenyltransferase enzyme geranylpyrophosphate:olivetolate transferase
(GOT; Fellermeier and Zenk 1998). GOT was sequenced by Page and Boubakir (2011). Most
commonly, geranylpyrophosphate (GPP) is condensed with OA to produce cannabigerolic acid
(CBGA). With lower affinity, GOT condenses also NPP with OA to produce CBGA’s optical isomer cannabinerolic acid (Taura et al. 1995a). Based on Shoyama et al. (1984) it can be deduced
that GOT is promiscuous and also accepts resorcinolic acid homologues other than OA, but
probably with lower affinity and/or turnover. Incorporation of these OA alkyl homologues results
in the corresponding homologues of CBGA (i.e., CBGA-C1 through to CBGA-C7) and cannabinerolic acid.
The variability among cannabinoid structures is mainly attributable to the incorporation of
different resorcinolic acid variants. Recently however, Pollastro et al. (2011) reported on a cannabinoid prenyl variant, a “sesqui-CBGA,” which is apparently the condensation product of the
sesquiterpene farnesylpyrophosphate and OA. According to Samuelsson (1999), unlike monoterpenes, these sesquiterpenes are not derived from the DOX pathway, but from the mevalonate
pathway (MVA).
The various homologues of CBGA and cannabinerolic acid are the central intermediates in
the cannabinoid pathway. Three different enzymatically catalyzed oxidative cyclizations lead
to three categories of cannabinoid end products: the various alkyl homologues of tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA-C 5), cannabidiolic acid (CBDA-C 5), and cannabichromenic acid
(CBCA-C5). Per enzymatic conversion, CBGA and cannabinerolic acid yield the same cyclization product (Morimoto et al. 1998; Taura et al. 1996). Kinetic parameters of THCA synthase
were ­characterized by Taura et al. (1995b) and the gene was sequenced by Sirikantaramas et al.

93

94

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

(2004); Taura et al. (1996) characterized the kinetic parameters of CBDA synthase and the gene
was sequenced by Taura et al. (2007); kinetic parameters of CBCA synthase were characterized by
Morimoto et al. (1998) but it remains to be sequenced.
A hydroxy-methoxy substitution reaction of the CBGA type intermediates results in cannabigerolic acid monomethyl ether (CBGAM; Shoyama et al. 1970). Most commonly occurring
is the C5 homologue CBGAM; the C3 homologue cannabigerovarinic acid monomethyl ether
(CBGVAM) is less common and other homologues occur as traces. Although obviously genetically controlled, as yet a gene/enzyme combination for this methoxylation has not been identified.
Post harvest, under the influence of heat, a nonenzymatic decarboxylation reaction takes place
which results in neutral cannabinoid molecules (e.g., THCA → THC). Under the influence of UV
light and the presence of oxygen these neutral structures can further degrade. Alkyl homologues
of cannabinol (CBN), cannabielsoin (CBS), and cannabicyclol (CBL) are the degradants of the
corresponding alkyl homologues of THC, CBD, and CBC, respectively.
The large number of possible CBGA alkyl homologues, the various parallel pathways from
CBGA type structures, and the various nonenzymatic conversions together lead to a large number of compounds classified as cannabinoids. However, in wild-type Cannabis plants and their
processed products only a few of these are found to occupy substantial proportions of the total
cannabinoid fraction. These are: THCA-C5 and its degradants THC-C5 and CBN-C5; THCA-C3
(THCVA, tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid) and its degradant THC-C3 (THCV, tetrahydrocannabivarin); CBDA-C5 and its degradant CBD-C5; CBCA-C5 and its degradant CBC-C5. All other
cannabinoids are generally classified as minor.
5.4.2 A model for chemotype inheritance

The inheritance of chemotype has been investigated in the course of a long-term medicinal
Cannabis breeding program, commenced at HortaPharm B.V. (The Netherlands) and continued
at GW Pharmaceuticals (UK). A key technique in this program has been the self-fertilization of
female plants after a chemically induced partial masculinization. In contrast to the natural outbreeding propagation system, this enables the creation of homozygous inbred lines, contrasting
crosses between homozygous female plants and the systematic study of chemotypical segregation
patterns in the cross progenies. Besides production clones of different chemotype (Table 5.1), the
program has also resulted in a genetic model for the regulation and inheritance of chemotype
(Fig. 5.2). Evidence for this model has been published by de Meijer et al. (2003, 2009a, 2009b) and
de Meijer and Hammond (2005).
The formation of the phenolic moieties incorporated in cannabinoids (resorcinolic acids) can
be obstructed by a monogenic factor. In the homozygous state, this factor induces a cannabinoidfree chemotype (de Meijer et al. 2009b). We postulated a single locus “O” with a mutant null allele
o that blocks the resorcinol synthesis and a functional wild-type allele O that does not interfere.
The null allele has a strong but incomplete dominance over the functional one. In segregating
progenies, the O/o genotypes have only one-tenth of the cannabinoid content of O/O genotypes.
The dominance of the knockout factor reflects the nature of a dominant repressor of a pathway
gene rather than a fatal mutation in a structural pathway gene itself.
A postulated multiple locus “A” determines which of the resorcinolic acids is formed, olivetolic
acid and/or divarinolic acid. Ongoing breeding experiments (unpublished) strongly suggest that
this genetic factor is oligo- or polygenic with locus A carrying alleles Ape1 to n and Apr1 to n. The
Ape1 to n alleles encode for the more common olivetolic acid synthesis and the subsequent formation of cannabinoids with a pentyl side chain. The Apr1 to n alleles encode for the less common

THE CHEMICAL PHENOTYPES (CHEMOTYPES) OF CANNABIS

Locus O

O: resorcinolic acids formed

Locus A1-A2–--An

Anpe

o: not formed
Anpr

X

Olivetolic acid + Geranylpyrophosphate + Divarinolic acid

CBGA
Locus B

BD0

BD BT0 BT

X
CBDA

CBGVA
BD0

X

BD BT0 BT

X
THCA

CBDVA

X
THCVA

Locus C (non-allelic, activity
modulated by morphological factors)

CBCA

CBCVA

Fig. 5.2 A genetic model for chemotype regulation. Locus O determines if cannabinoids are formed.
The multiple locus A determines the alkyl homologue ratio. Wild-type alleles at locus B control the
ratios CBDA:THCA and/or CBDVA:THCVA whereas mutant alleles induce CBGA and/or CBGVA
accumulation. Locus C is fixed but its chemotypical effect can be strongly modulated by morphological factors.

divarinolic acid synthesis and the subsequent formation of propyl cannabinoids. The codominant
A alleles contribute additively but not equally to the chemotype (propyl:pentyl cannabinoid ratio);
some having major, and others minor effects. Cannabinoid alkyl homologues other than the
propyl- and pentyl ones do occur (C1 through to C7 homologues have been detected in Cannabis
extracts). So far these homologues have only been detected in insignificant proportions and therefore the corresponding pathways are not covered by the model.
Olivetolic acid and divarinolic acid condense with geranylpyrophosphate into CBGA and
cannabigerovarinic acid (CBGVA) respectively. There are no signs of allelism at this level, the
enzyme GOT appears to be promiscuous and prenylates resorcinolic acids regardless of the alkyl
side chain length. In spite of GOT’s promiscuity for resorcinolic acid substrates, experiments by
Shoyama et al. (1984) suggest that the enzyme’s substrate affinity might be differential, with a
preference for the C5 homologue. CBGA and CBGVA are classified as true cannabinoids and form
the substrates for a number of enzymatic conversions into cannabinoid end products: CBGA is
converted into THCA, CBDA, CBCA, and CBGAM, respectively; CBGVA into THCVA, CBDVA
(cannabidivarinic acid), CBCVA (cannabichromevarinic acid), and CBGVAM, respectively.
A monogenic locus “B” that controls the conversions of CBGA/CBGVA into THCA/THCVA
(allele BT) and CBDA/CBDVA (allele BD) regardless of the alkyl side chain is postulated (de
Meijer et al. 2003). Alleles BT and BD are codominant, i.e., heterozygous individuals (genotype
BT/BD) express a chemotype composed of substantial proportions of both THCA/THCVA and
CBDA/CBDVA. The ratios CBDA:THCA and CBDVA:THCVA are highly progeny specific and
can deviate strongly from 1/1. This has been attributed to sequence variation in the BT and BD
alleles, leading to synthases with differential catalytic properties. At the extremes of the locus B
allelic range we find recessive, minimally functional, and nonfunctional alleles. In the homozygous state these induce a chemotype characterized by a high proportion of the accumulated
precursor CBGA and/or CBGVA (de Meijer and Hammond 2005). Two of such alleles have been

95

96

Constituents, History, International Control, Cultivation, and Phenotypes of Cannabis

A

B

C

D

E

Fig. 5.3 (See also colour plate section.) Glandular trichomes associated to different chemotypes.
(A) CBDA- and/or THCA-predominant plants carry stalked trichomes with large transparent heads.
CBGA-predominant clones with underlying BD02/BD02 (B) and BT0/BT0 (C) genotype both show white
opaque trichome heads. (D) Cannabinoid-free chemotypes carry trichomes with shriveled heads.
(E) Optimized CBCA-predominant clones lack stalked trichomes and show a high density of sessile
trichomes.
© T.J. Wilkinson.

THE CHEMICAL PHENOTYPES (CHEMOTYPES) OF CANNABIS

found in the form of BD mutants and are indicated as BD01 and BD02. A BT mutant, indicated as
BT0, has subsequently been found. It also induces a substantial CBGA and/or CBGVA accumulation along with a minimal THCA/THCVA production (unpublished data).
Independently of the THCA and CBDA synthase genes, a locus “C” regulates the conversion of
CBGA/CBGVA into CBCA/CBCVA (de Meijer et al. 2009a). Locus C is fixed; it shows no allelism. Nevertheless, Cannabis chemotypes can vary greatly in the proportion of CBCA/CBCVA that
they contain. The ontogenetic (developmental) variation in CBCA proportion has been commonly observed (e.g., Morimoto et al. 1997, 1998; Rowan and Fairbairn 1977; Shoyama et al. 1975).
Apparently, CBCA synthase best competes with THCA synthase and CBDA synthase for the common CBGA/CBGVA substrate in the early juvenile stage. It would be problematic to exploit this feature for commercial CBCA or CBCVA production but, as an alternative strategy, we found different
morphological mutations (reflecting underlying mono- and polygenic mechanisms) that enhance the
activity of CBCA synthase throughout the life cycle of the plant. These mutations have in common
the reduction of the presence of stalked glandular trichomes to the advantage of sessile trichomes
(Fig. 5.3E) and are indicated as “PJC” genes (prolonged juvenile chemotype) in our model. The common “wild-type” status, not inducing this prolonged juvenile chemotype, is referred to as “pjc.”
A fourth conversion, the methoxylation of CBGA and CBGVA results in the monomethyl
ethers CBGAM and CBGVAM, respectively (Shoyama 1970). These compounds are not very
prominent in the cannabinoid profile. Small and Beckstead (1973) reported the consistent presence of small amounts of CBGAM in plants from north-eastern Asia. We found that the presence of methoxylated cannabinoids is irregular but obviously inheritable. The methoxylation of
CBGA and CBGVA does not appear to be controlled by the loci B and C. We found CBGAM and
CBGVAM proportions up to 5% of the total cannabinoid fraction of certain lineages and hypothesized that such plants carry an active allele M in the homozygous state at a locus M, whereas
plants devoid of these compounds carry the wild-type, inactive allele m. A breeding experiment
aimed at the clarification and possible utilization of this mechanism has recently commenced and
the role of CBGAM and CBGVAM in chemotypes will not be addressed further.
Obviously there is a gap between a genetic model that predicts and explains the outcome of
breeding experiments and the actual events at the molecular level. Increasingly the different
chemotypes are being investigated in transcriptome and gene expression studies which further
clarify the mechanisms of chemotype regulation. For example, the powerful effect of the cannabinoid knockout factor at the monogenic locus O in heterozygous individuals was initially hard
to explain. Recently it was found that the OLS (TKS) gene sequence of cannabinoid-free plants is
identical to the wild-type sequence but that the gene is not expressed, probably due to a dominant
monogenic repressor (unpublished data). In addition, the hypothesis that the accumulation of
CBGA and CBGVA is due to normally expressed but minimally functional and nonfunctional
alleles at locus B, is now supported by transcriptome analysis. Our CBGA/CBGVA-rich plants
were found to express sequence variants of THCA and CBDA synthase, with radical amino acid
substitutions in the conserved domains (unpublished data).

5.5 Results of chemotype breeding
5.5.1 Chemotype breeding

Chemotype manipulation is a target in the context of fiber/seed hemp breeding (suppression of
THCA content), recreational drug breeding (high THCA content), and pharmaceutical drug breeding (various cannabinoid profiles). The most common chemotypes are CBDA and THCA predominant and can be encountered in all crop groups. Other, more specific chemotypes result from

97

98

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

breeding programs such as the one initiated at HortaPharm and continued at GW, committed to
increasing the purity and content of a range of different cannabinoids for commercial development.
At an early stage in this program, a key technique allowing mass-scale self-fertilization and mutual
crossing of female plants was developed. Source materials of various provenances and their first
inbred generations were screened through gas chromatographic (GC) analyses. Selected progenitor
genotypes, often with deviant profiles, were preserved in seed collections and clone libraries and
used for line selection to obtain true-breeding (homozygous) inbred lines. Novel, recombinant cannabinoid profiles were established by crossing homozygous materials with different pure profiles,
followed by self-fertilization. The newly inbred parental clones were then added to the library and,
per chemotype, mutually crossed, in order to produce vigorous heterotic hybrids for production.
5.5.2 Currently available pure chemotypes
5.5.2.1 THCA-predominant chemotype

THCA predominance can be considered as a “wild-type” condition. In terms of the genetic model,
it results from wild-type alleles at the loci O, A and B and a wild-type status (pjc) at the loci that induce
the morphological features associated with prolonged CBCA catalysis: O/O-Ape1 to n /Ape1 to nBT/BT-pjcmono/pjcmono-pjcpoly . THCA predominance is not exclusively associated with drug
strains. Individuals of drug type landraces can be CBDA predominant or show a mixed CBDA/
THCA profile, whereas certain fiber hemp strains of Far-Eastern provenance often comprise
THCA-predominant individuals. Common relationships between cannabinoid chemotype and
fiber yield or quality parameters are artificial and by no means natural. The purity of THCA,
i.e., its proportion in % w/w in the total cannabinoid fraction reaches levels of 96–98%, with a
residual fraction composed of traces of THCVA, CBCA, and CBGA. Modern, specifically bred
THCA-predominant drug clones express total cannabinoid contents up to 25–30% w/w of the dry,
“manicured” inflorescences. The total cannabinoid content of THCA-predominant drug landrace
materials and fiber strains is much lower, 2–5% and <2%, respectively.
In marijuana strains, even landraces (e.g., from Thailand and South Africa), locus B has usually
reached a fixed homozygous status (BT/BT) resulting in populations that are entirely composed of
THCA-predominant individuals. In contrast, traditional hashish landraces (e.g., from Morocco,
Pakistan, Afghanistan) are usually polymorphic at locus B and comprise THCA- and CBDApredominant and -intermediate individuals. A plausible explanation for this difference is the fact
that marijuana (dried inflorescences) is still an intact and recognizable tissue which allows seed
retention. This enables generation from individuals selected for an appreciated smoking quality,
i.e., high THCA purity. With a monogenic factor inducing a desirable phenotype, it is quite simple
to select against the undesired allele (BD) and create a fixed homozygous population. Hashish is
traditionally collected in the field as a bulk crop extract and post harvest, when the overall quality
is assessed, it is no longer possible to select the seeds from particular plants.
Numerous THCA-predominant clones and seed progenies circulate on the recreational market.
Due to their illicit nature, these materials are not formally registered so their identity and stability are not guaranteed. The many different names (e.g., Haze, Skunk, Northern Lights, White
Widow) cannot be considered as unequivocal cultivar names. They refer to more or less coherent groups, all THCA predominant, but with differences in the terpene entourage, morphology,
phenological development, photoperiod requirements for flower induction, etc. A small number
of THCA clones have been through the Plant Breeders Rights registration procedure and received
European Breeders Rights. Examples are the cultivar “Medisins” (HortaPharm) and GW’s clones
used for the raw material production of Sativex®.

THE CHEMICAL PHENOTYPES (CHEMOTYPES) OF CANNABIS

5.5.2.2 CBDA-predominant chemotype

As with THCA predominance, CBDA predominance is also a common wild-type condition. It
results from wild-type alleles at the loci O, A, and B and a wild-type (pjc) status at the loci that induce
the morphological features associated with prolonged CBCA catalysis: O/O-Ape1 to n /Ape1 to nBD/BD-pjcmono/pjcmono-pjcpoly . CBDA predominance is common and usually fixed in modern
hemp fiber and seed cultivars. It is common, but not usually fixed, in fiber and hashish landraces.
The purity of CBDA, i.e., the proportion in % w/w in the total cannabinoid fraction reaches levels
of 85–90%, with a residual fraction composed of CBDVA, CBCA, CBGAM, THCA, and CBGA.
In specially bred CBDA drug clones the total cannabinoid content reaches levels as in THCA
clones: up to 25–30% w/w of the dry, “manicured” inflorescences. In hashish landraces and fiber
strains, individuals reach much lower levels of 1–5%. The consistent presence of a 4–5% w/w
proportion of THCA in the total cannabinoid fraction of CBDA-predominant plants is intriguing but has rarely been addressed in the literature. Lydon and Teramura (1987) ruled out CBDA
as photochemically converted into THCA. Possibly, besides the main cyclization of CBGA to
CBDA, CBDA synthase might be able to perform a second minor conversion of CBGA to THCA.
Evolutionarily this would indicate that the CBDA synthase gene has evolved from an ancestral
THCA synthase gene (vice versa, THCA-predominant plants contain practically no CBDA).
Alternatively, this THCA could be the product of “inactive” THCA synthase homologues that
were reported by Kojoma et al. (2006) for CBDA-predominant and -intermediate CBDA/THCA
chemotypes. However, these homologues were c.40 SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) different from the active sequence published by Sirikantaramas et al. (2004), so it is questionable if
they really have retained any catalytic ability. Furthermore, the small amount of THCA in CBDA
plants occurs invariably in the form of both the cis and the trans isomer in a 1:3 ratio, whereas in
true THCA-predominant plants solely the trans isomer is found (A. Sutton, personal communication). Although not a perfect 1:1 racemic ratio, this finding suggests as a third possibility that a
nonenzymatic reaction occurs in these plants. A possible approach to clarify this issue could be an
in vitro assay with each of the heterologously expressed proteins of the THCA and CBDA synthase
sequence variants. Practically, the consistent presence of some THCA in CBDA-predominant
chemotypes can be problematic in the case of fiber and seed cultivars with a relatively high overall
cannabinoid content. For these, a limit of 0.2% THC is legally enforced in the European Union
(EU). As THCA occupies 4–5% of the cannabinoid fraction of a CBDA-predominant chemotype
this limit will be reached at a total cannabinoid content of 4% w/w. In CBD-rich pharmaceutical
extracts too, the associated presence of psychoactive THC can be undesirable.
Around 60 fiber cultivars with a CBDA-predominant chemotype are registered in the EU.
Plants Breeders Rights have also been obtained for GW’s CBDA-rich clones used for the raw
material production of Sativex®.
5.5.2.3 CBGA-predominant chemotypes

Fournier et al. (1987) were the first to report on a CBGA-rich plant in a normally CBDApredominant French fiber hemp population. Accumulation of this otherwise minor compound
is a mutant condition induced by an absence of sufficiently active THCA and/or CBDA synthase.
According to the genetic model, CBGA predominance results from wild-type alleles at the loci O
and A, mutant (“null”) alleles at locus B (de Meijer and Hammond 2005) and a wild-type status
(pjc) at the loci that induce the morphological features associated with prolonged CBCA catalysis:
O/O-Ape1 to n /Ape1 to n-B0/B0-pjcmono/pjcmono-pjcpoly . We have obtained two different CBGApredominant chemotypes with a residual presence of CBDA from fiber hemp source populations.
The inbred generation of a marijuana clone revealed a second CBGA-rich chemotype with a

99

100

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

residual presence of THCA. It was postulated that the first category is attributable to minimally
functional CBDA synthase (alleles BD01 and BD02, which was subsequently found), and the second
category to minimally functional THCA synthase (allele BT0). The purity of CBGA-predominant
plants can vary, depending on the impact of the mutation involved. Genotypes that are homozygous for the alleles BD01, BD02, and BT0, typically express CBGA proportions of 90%, nearly 100%,
and 85% respectively, in the cannabinoid fraction. Regardless of the underlying genotype, all
CBGA-rich chemotypes share the morphological feature of white opaque glandular trichome
heads (Fig. 5.3B and C). It is remarkable that Gorshkova et al. (1988) characterized this same morphological phenotype as indicative of an absence of cannabinoids. There is no obvious inhibitory
feedback in cannabinoid metabolism if the normal end products CBDA and/or THCA are absent
or are only poorly formed. After some committed breeding effort the absolute cannabinoid contents of CBGA-predominant plants now reach levels similar to high-content THCA and CBDA
plants (Table 5.1). In 2003, Plant Breeders Rights were obtained for the Italian, CBGA-rich fiber
hemp cultivar Carma. The average CBGA proportion in the cannabinoid fraction of this cultivar
is c.55%, with a residual fraction of mainly CBDA (G. Grassi, personal communication).
5.5.2.4 CBCA-rich and -predominant chemotypes

CBCA is often considered a minor cannabinoid and usually occurs only in proportions of 0–5%
in the cannabinoid fraction of most mature Cannabis plants of all chemotypes. It is more prominent in juvenile profiles (e.g., Morimoto et al. 1997, 1998; Rowan and Fairbairn 1977; Shoyama
et al. 1975). Morphological mutants were found in Afghan hashish and Korean fiber landraces
that maintain somewhat higher proportions of CBCA (15–30% of the cannabinoid fraction)
throughout the course of the life cycle (de Meijer et al. 2009b). These mutations have in common
the suppression of the formation of bracts and bracteoles and thereby, that of stalked glandular
trichomes. This leads to a relative abundance of sessile trichomes on the floral tissues (Fig. 5.3E).
Besides these inheritable morphological factors we have never found any indication that the variation in CBCA content is attributable to allelism at a “biochemical locus” encoding an active and
an inactive CBCA synthase (de Meijer et al. 2009b). The breeding strategy to obtain pure CBCA
plants was therefore based on “stacking” the different morphological mutations and obstructing
the competitive pathways from CBGA to THCA and/or CBDA. This was realized by establishing
a BD02/BD02 genotype at locus B. In selected clones, CBCA purities at maturity of up to 95% of
the cannabinoid fraction were achieved, with CBCA-C1, CBCA-C3, cannabicyclol (CBL, a CBCA
degradant), THCA (cis and trans isomers), and CBGA as additional trace compounds. In terms of
the genetic model, these optimized clones have the genotype: O/O-Ape1 to n /Ape1 to n- BD02/BD02 PJCmono/PJCmono-PJCpoly . As an inherent effect of the absence of bracts and bracteoles that carry
the highly productive stalked trichomes, such plants can only attain a relatively low overall cannabinoid content. So far, the maximum content in a dry homogenized BRM appears to be 3–3.5% w/w.
Unlike other chemotypes, the CBCA-rich chemotype shows a certain sensitivity to its environment. At high light intensities, the total cannabinoid content may increase at the expense of the
CBCA purity (de Meijer et al. 2009a). This is probably due to the fact that CBCA synthase quickly
reaches its catalytic maximum and then leaves a surplus of the CBGA substrate unconverted.
CBCA-rich clones have not been submitted for Plant Breeders Rights but the chemotype is
categorically protected by a patent (WO2009/125198).
5.5.2.5 THCVA- and other propyl cannabinoid-rich chemotypes

Generally, propyl cannabinoids occur in low proportions (< 2%) of the total cannabinoid fraction. In situ, THCVA appears the only compound that is occasionally found in more substantial

THE CHEMICAL PHENOTYPES (CHEMOTYPES) OF CANNABIS

A
pA
70

i.s.

65

CBG

60
55
50
45
(CBD)

40
35
8

10

12

B
pA
70

14

16

18

min

18

min

CBGV
i.s.

60
50
40
30
20

CBG

10
0
6

8

10

12

14

16

Fig. 5.4 Chromatograms of unusual chemotypes obtained using a gas chromatograph with flame
ionization detector (GC-FID). Peaks indicate cannabinoids in decarboxylated form. Data originate
from different GC runs and between chromatograms retention times cannot be compared. I.s. =
added internal standard. (A) clone M281, CBG purity ≤ 99.9%; (B) clone M350, CBGV purity 87%;
(C) clone M408, THCV purity 92%; (D) clone M277, CBDV purity 73%; (E) clone M394, CBC purity
95%; (F) seedling 2012.16.3.26.6, CBCV purity 76%; (G) clone M299, cannabinoid-free.

proportions. It can reach various levels, up to 70% of the cannabinoid fraction, in plants from
populations belonging to different crop-use groups. These often originate in China (fiber and
seed landraces) and Southern Africa (marijuana landraces). In terms of the genetic model,
THCVA-rich plants carry a number of Apr alleles at the multiple locus A and are homozygous
BT/BT at locus B. Geographical isolation is a possible explanation of why in situ the Apr alleles do

101

102

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

C
pA
40

THCV

i.s.

30

20

10

THC

0
6

8

10

12

14

16

18

min

16

18

min

D
pA
80

CBDV
i.s.

70
60
CBCV
CBD
CBGVM

50

THCV

CBC

THC

40

8

10

12

14

Fig. 5.4 (continued)

not usually occur in combination with a BD/BD and B0/B0 genotype or with the morphological
PJC factors in order to produce CBDVA-, CBGVA-, or CBCVA-rich chemotypes, respectively.
In our breeding program we were successful in producing CBDVA- and CBGVA-predominant
clones whereas the breeding of CBCVA-predominant plants is still in an early stage. Further
improvement of the propyl cannabinoid purity in these chemotypes is ongoing and promising.
For THCVA, a level of over 92% of the cannabinoid fraction has already been achieved by stacking
Apr alleles from different progenitors in hybrid offspring (Fig. 5.4C). THCA is the main residual
cannabinoid in THCVA-predominant plants and its presence is undesirable as it requires chemical purification to avoid the presence of psychoactive, and possibly THCV-counteracting, THC in
THCV-based medicines. The purities currently achieved for CBGVA, CBDVA, and CBCVA are

THE CHEMICAL PHENOTYPES (CHEMOTYPES) OF CANNABIS

E
pA
17.5
i.s.

15

CBC

12.5
10
7.5
5
2.5
0

CBCV
6

8

10

CBL

12

THC
14

CBG

16

18

min

16

18

min

F
pA
12

i.s.

10

CBCV

8
6
4
CBC

2
THCV

0
−2

6

8

10

12

14

Fig. 5.4 (continued)

87%, 73%, and 76% and in chemotypes with these compounds, the corresponding pentyl homologues also form the main residual cannabinoid (Fig. 5.4B, D, and F). The characteristic trichome
morphology of CBGA- and CBCA-predominant chemotypes (Fig. 5.3B, C, and E) is also associated to the CBGVA- and CBCVA-predominant chemotypes.
The molecular basis of the C3/C5 regulation at the postulated locus A remains to be clarified.
We compared flower transcriptomes of C3-rich- and pure C5 segregant bulks of segregating, single
plant progenies. In the phenolic pathway, meaningful variation in gene sequence or gene expression was not found at the level of the candidate genes AAE1, TKS, and OAC (data unpublished).
This suggests that the C3:C5 ratio is regulated by still unknown genes involved in the production
of the short-chain fatty acid precursors: butanoate and hexanoate.

103

104

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

G
pA
70
65

i.s.

60
55
50
45
40
35
8

10

12

14

16

18

min

Fig. 5.4 (continued)

Currently, no Plant Breeders Rights or patents are known for THCVA- or other propyl-rich
materials.
5.5.2.6 Cannabinoid-free chemotype

Our cannabinoid-free chemotype appears to be the consequence of an obstacle in the phenolic pathway towards the resorcinolic acids (de Meijer et al. 2009b). In terms of our genetic model, these plants
carry a mutant allele in the homozygous state at the single locus O. It is conceivable that other mechanisms also induce an absence of cannabinoids. Gorshkova et al. (1988) reported on a cannabinoidfree chemotype attributable to a total absence of glandular trichomes. Nonfunctional trichomes, an
obstacle in the terpenoid pathway towards geranylpyrophosphate or a mutation in GOT, thereby
disabling the terpeno-phenolic condensation, would also obstruct cannabinoid production, but as
yet there are no reports on cannabinoid-free chemotypes induced by such mechanisms.
The cannabinoid knockout gene expressed in our clones was derived from a low-cannabinoidcontent fiber cultivar. In certain specimens of this cultivar there were no detectable cannabinoids.
When crossed with high-content plants, an F1 with low cannabinoid levels (ca 1/10 of that of the
high-content parent) was produced, whereas F2 generations obtained from self-fertilized F1 individuals segregated in three discrete chemotypes: cannabinoid-free, low-content (as F1), and highcontent individuals in a monogenic 1:2:1 ratio. The severe reduction in the cannabinoid content
of the heterozygous groups suggests that the knockout factor is not a mutated structural pathway
gene. It is more likely to be a regulator, in this case probably a dominant repressor of OLS/TKS
(F. Licausi, unpublished data). Repeated backcrossing of the first-generation cannabinoid-­free
plants with high-content materials has resulted in a range of cannabinoid-free plants with a
dense, branched habitus, high trichome density, and a strong fragrance. Knockout homologues
with a strong resemblance to the Sativex® THCA and CBDA clones (Fig. 5.5) plus a series of
cannabinoid-free clones predominant in each one of the monoterpenes: pinene, myrcene, terpinolene, carene, and limonene, have all been bred through backcrossing. The fact that these
clones contain terpenes (mono- and sesqui-) in normal quantities, demonstrates that neither the

A

M16
B

C

M319

M3
D

M299

Fig. 5.5 (See also colour plate section.) Macro- and microscopic photos of clones used for Sativex®
raw material production, M16 (CBD) and M3 (THC), and their respective cannabinoid-free
­homologues M319 and M299. The homologues were selected from backcross progenies
(e.g., M299 = M3 × (M3 × (M3 × knockout progenitor))) and share 87.5% genetic identity with
the corresponding “original.”
© T.J. Wilkinson.

106

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

terpenoid pathway nor the functionality of the trichomes is affected by the knockout factor. Such
materials could play a role in clarifying cannabinoid-terpenoid interactions (“entourage effects”;
Russo 2011). The incorporation of purified cannabinoids (or combinations thereof) into various
cannabinoid-free BRMs would enable a systematic study of the possible differential physiological
effects of pure cannabinoids versus cannabinoids extracts. Another obvious application of the
knockout factor is in breeding cannabinoid-free fiber hemp and seed hemp. The absence of the
usual terpenophenolic end products together with the presence of most of the pathway enzymes
has made our cannabinoid-free plants useful as chemical-analytical reference material and as
crude enzyme sources for in vitro assays.
Patent protection has been obtained for cannabinoid-free clones and their use as a reference
plant (WO2008/146006).
5.5.3 Chemotype and evolutionary fitness

Cannabinoids can reach extremely high concentrations in above-ground plant tissues. Various
theories, all relating to the defense against biotic and abiotic stress, attribute ecological benefits to
the presence of cannabinoids in general, or to the presence of certain cannabinoids in particular
(Appendino et al. 2008; Lydon et al. 1987; Morimoto et al. 2007; Pate 1983). Our breeding experiments and the crop production of different chemotypes take place in a protected indoor environment, but they should still reveal some relationship between chemotype and fitness, if it does
exist. The chemotype segregating progenies obtained from a single self-fertilized parent, where
all individuals are highly related sister plants, are particularly suitable to compare the strengths or
susceptibilities of contrasting chemotypes. However, compelling associations between chemotype
(including the cannabinoid-free plants) and features such as seed set, plant size, and infestation
with insects or fungi have so far not been observed.

5.6 Molecular studies of chemotype regulation
5.6.1 Historic overview

A more molecular approach to the underlying genetics of Cannabis chemotype perhaps commenced with the in vitro testing of crude Cannabis enzyme extracts (e.g., Shoyama et al.
1984). This was followed by the purification and characterization of the important pathway
enzymes THCA synthase, CBDA synthase, and CBCA synthase by Taura et al. (1995b, 1996)
and Morimoto et al. (1998), respectively. THCA synthase and CBDA synthase were also the
first pathway genes to be sequenced, by Sirikantaramas et al. (2004) and Taura et al. (2007),
respectively. THCA synthase is polymorphic and Kojoma et al. (2006) published sequence
variants found in plants with a THCA-predominant, CBDA-predominant, and mixed THCA/
CBDA chemotype. A number of these sequence variants encodes an active synthase whereas,
in the CBDA-predominant plants, only inactive or minimally active THCA sequences occur,
with many amino acid substitutions compared to the active ones. Different molecular markers
(PCR products) associated with CBDA or THCA synthase sequences have been developed (e.g.,
de Meijer et al. 2003; Kojoma et al. 2006; Pacifico et al. 2006; Rotherham and Harbison 2010).
Very recently, Shoyama et al. (2012) elucidated the structure–function relationship of the active
THCA synthase protein.
One step upstream in the pathway, the prenyl transferase GOT, that catalyzes the condensation
of the resorcinolic acids with geranylpyrophosphate into CBGA type products, was sequenced by
Page and Boubakir (2011).

THE CHEMICAL PHENOTYPES (CHEMOTYPES) OF CANNABIS

Further upstream in the phenolic pathway, three crucial genes for the n-alkyl-resorcinolic acid
synthesis have now been sequenced. Stout et al. (2012) identified the acyl activating enzyme AAE1
that binds coenzyme-A to the short-chain fatty acids hexanoate, butanoate, and malonate. The
process of the condensation of the fatty acid-CoA substrates into resorcinolic acids by a polyketide
type mechanism has long been unclear, but was recently clarified by Gagne et al. 2012. For this
two-step reaction both a TKS and an OAC are required. TKS had already been sequenced by Taura
et al. (2009) under the name olivetol synthase (OLS). OAC was sequenced by Gagne et al. (2012).
In 2011 the first entire draft genomes for Cannabis, based on two different THCA-predominant
drug strains, were published by McKernan et al. (see http://www.medicinalgenomics.com). Van
Bakel et al. (2011) published the transcriptomes (expressed genes) of various tissues of a highcontent THCA drug strain and a low-content CBDA-predominant oil seed cultivar as well as the
draft genomes of these accessions and a low-content fiber cultivar.
Although the cannabinoid pathways have now largely been elucidated, there are still some
important issues to be resolved: the CBCA synthase sequence, the regulation of the methoxylation
of CBGA type structures into monomethyl ethers, and the mechanism of the cannabinoid alkyl
side chain regulation. In order to study these topics, F2 progenies, obtained from self-fertilized
parents which segregate the relevant chemotypes, would be more promising plant materials than
unrelated drug and fiber strains.
5.6.2 Prospects for novel chemotype breeding

As has been presented here, conventional plant breeding, with the inclusion of the cannabinoid
knockout, has resulted in nine fairly pure chemotypes. Additionally, an increase in the proportions of CBGA type monomethyl ethers (CBGAM and CBGVAM) might be possible. Since the
conventional approach appears to have reached its limit, it is opportune to explore the prospects
of molecular techniques for a further expansion of the chemotype portfolio. With cannabinoid
contents up to 25–30% of the floral dry weight already achieved, there is no urgency to improve
the quantitative aspects of chemotype, a situation quite different from that with plants producing
opiates, artemisin, taxol, etc. Innovations such as (1) chemotypes containing substantial proportions of truly novel terpenophenolic compounds (e.g., with branched alkyl- or aromatic side
chains); (2) chemotypes with dramatically increased proportions of known, but currently very
minor substances (e.g., rich in methyl- or butyl cannabinoids, rich in farnesyl cannabinoids);
(3) chemotypes lacking naturally associated, undesirable compounds (e.g., CBDA-predominant
plants devoid of THCA) would be more valuable. Page and Boubakir (2011) mention the possibility of mutating their sequenced prenyltransferase gene (GOT) in order to enhance cannabinoid
production or to obtain cannabinoid-free plants by gene inactivation. Van Bakel et al. (2011)
speculate that the identification of candidate pathway genes may eventually result in the development of cannabinoid-free hemp cultivars and CBCA-rich materials. McKernan et al. (2011, http://
www.medicinalgenomics.com) hope that their draft genome, once further annotated, will help to
enhance the expression of some, currently minor, cannabinoids. These ambitions are remarkably
modest and largely aimed at existing chemotypes.
Modification of the phenolic pathway achieved by exploiting recent advances in Cannabis
molecular biology could be an interesting new direction. Currently available homologues with
the same aromatic structure but a different alkyl side chain, such as THC and THCV, can show
totally different activity. The Cannabis gene(s) regulating the C3:C5 cannabinoid ratio, once identified, would be an interesting target for site-specific mutagenesis. This may lead to a substantial
production of resorcinolic acids with alkyl chains other than propyl or pentyl. Alternatively, there

107

108

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

might be a transgenic option to modify this pathway. Some other plant species do produce resorcinols, resorcinolic acids, and even terpenophenolic acids, often in a different form from that
of Cannabis. It is likely that such plants carry genes homologous to certain cannabinoid pathway
genes. Transfer to, and heterologous expression of, such genes in Cannabis may result in variant
precursors and products. One uncertainty with both site-specific mutagenesis and heterologous
expression is that the desired incorporation of alternative precursors into cannabinoid end products requires substrate promiscuity of the enzymes downstream. Shoyama et al. (2012) suggest
that their structure–function study of THCA synthase allows the development of mutants with
altered substrate preference or catalytic activity. This could lead to novel THCA derivatives. In
the plant, suitable substrates other than CBGA and cannabinerolic acid homologues do not occur
naturally, but they could result from an artificially modified phenolic pathway. Altered catalytic
activity of THCA (and CBDA) synthase would also be of practical interest were it to result in new
cyclization products.

References
Anderson, L.C. (1980). Leaf variation among Cannabis species from a controlled garden. Harvard
University Botanical Museum Leaflets, 28, 61–69.
Appendino, G., Gibbons, S., Giana, A., et al. (2008). Antibacterial cannabinoids from Cannabis sativa: a
structure-activity study. Journal of Natural Products, 71, 1427–1430.
Bakel, H. van, Stout, J.M., Cote, A.G., et al. (2011). The draft genome and transcriptome of Cannabis
sativa. Genome Biology, 12, R102.
Berg, R.G. van den (1999). Cultivar-group classification. In: S. Andrews, A.C. Leslie, and C. Alexander
(eds.). Taxonomy of Cultivated Plants, III rd International Symposium of Cultivated Plants. Kew: Royal
Botanic Gardens, pp. 135–143.
Berg, R.G. van den (2004). The crop concept in cultonomic classification. In: C.G. Davidson and P. Trehane
(eds.). IVth Int. Symp. of Cultivated Plants. Acta Horticulturae, 634, 141–144.
Bohlmann, F. and Hoffmann, E. (1979). Cannabigerol-ähnliche verbindungen aus Helichrysum umbraculigerum. Phytochemistry, 18, 1371–1374.
Brickell, C.D., Baum, B.R., Hetterscheid, W.L.A., et al. (2004). International Code of Nomenclature for
Cultivated Plants. Acta Horticulturae, 647.
ElSohly, M.A. and Slade, D. (2005). Chemical constituents of marijuana: the complex mixture of natural
cannabinoids. Life Sciences, 78, 539–548.
Fellermeier, M. and Zenk, M.H. (1998). Prenylation of olivetolate by a hemp transferase yields cannabigerolic acid, the precursor of tetrahydrocannabinol. FEBS Letters, 427, 283–285.
Fellermeier, M., Eisenreich, W., Bacher, A., and Zenk, M.H. (2001). Biosynthesis of cannabinoids.
Incorporation experiments with 13C-labeled glucoses. European Journal of Biochemistry, 268, 1596–1604.
Fournier, G., Richez-Dumaois, C., Duvezin, J., Mathieu, J.P., and Paris, M. (1987). Identification of a new
chemotype in Cannabis sativa: cannabigerol-dominant plants, biogenetic and agronomic prospects.
Planta Medica, 53, 277–280.
Gagne, S.J., Stout, J.M., Liu, E., Boubakir, Z., Clark, S.M., and Page J. (2012). Identification of olivetolic
acid cyclase from Cannabis sativa reveals a unique catalytic route to plant polyketides. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109, 12811–12816.
Gorshkova, L.M., Senchenko, G.I., and Virovets, V.G. (1988). Method of evaluating hemp plants for content of cannabinoid compounds [Russian]. Referativnyi Zhurnal, 12.65.322.
Hillig, K.W. and Mahlberg, P.G. (2004). A chemotaxonomic analysis of cannabinoid variation in Cannabis
(Cannabaceae). American Journal of Botany, 91, 966–975.

THE CHEMICAL PHENOTYPES (CHEMOTYPES) OF CANNABIS

Kojoma, M., Seki, H., Yoshida, S., and Muranaka, T. (2006). DNA polymorphisms in the tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA) synthase gene in “drug type” and “fibre type” Cannabis sativa L. Forensic Science
International, 159, 132–140.
Lydon, J. and Teramura, A.H. (1987). Photochemical decomposition of cannabidiol in its resin base.
Phytochemistry, 26, 1216–1217.
Lydon, J., Teramura, A.H., and Coffman, C.B. (1987). UV-B radiation effects on photosynthesis, growth
and cannabinoid production of two Cannabis sativa chemotypes. Photochemistry and Photobiology, 46,
201–206.
Meijer, E.P.M. de, Bagatta, M., Carboni, A., et al. (2003). The inheritance of chemical phenotype in
Cannabis sativa L. Genetics, 163, 335–346.
Meijer, E.P.M. de and Hammond, K.M. (2005). The inheritance of chemical phenotype in Cannabis sativa
L. (II): cannabigerol predominant plants. Euphytica, 145, 189–198.
Meijer, E.P.M. de, Hammond, K.M., and Micheler, M. (2009a). The inheritance of chemical phenotype in
Cannabis sativa L. (III): variation in cannabichromene proportion. Euphytica, 165, 293–311.
Meijer, E.P.M. de, Hammond, K.M., and Sutton, A. (2009b). The inheritance of chemical phenotype in
Cannabis sativa L. (IV): cannabinoid-free plants. Euphytica, 168, 95–112.
Meijer, E.P.M. and Keizer, L.C.P. (1996). Patterns of diversity in Cannabis. Genetic Resources and Crop
Evolution, 43, 41–52.
Morimoto, S., Komatsu, K., Taura, F., and Shoyama, Y. (1997). Enzymological evidence for cannabichromenic acid biosynthesis. Journal of Natural Products, 60, 854–857.
Morimoto, S., Komatsu, K., Taura, F., and Shoyama, Y. (1998). Purification and characterisation of cannabichromenic acid synthase from Cannabis sativa. Phytochemistry, 49, 1525–1529.
Morimoto, S., Tanaka, Y. and Sasaki, K., et al. (2007). Identification and characterisation of cannabinoids
that induce cell death through mitochondrial permeability transition in Cannabis leaf cells. The Journal
of Biological Chemistry, 282, 20739–20751.
Pacifico, D., Miselli, F., Micheler, M., Carboni, A., Ranalli, P., and Mandolino, G. (2006). Genetics and
marker-assisted selection of the chemotype in Cannabis sativa L. Molecular Breeding, 17, 257–268.
Page, J.E. and Boubakir, Z. (2011). Aromatic prenyltransferase from Cannabis. Patent WO 2011/017798 A1.
Pate, D.W. (1983). Possible role of ultraviolet radiation in evolution of Cannabis chemotypes. Economic
Botany, 37, 396–405.
Pollastro, F., Taglialatela-Scafati, O. and Allarà, M., et al. (2011). Bioactive prenylogous cannabinoid from
fiber hemp (Cannabis sativa). Journal of Natural Products, 74, 2019–2022.
Raederstorff, D., Schwager, J., and Schueler, G. (2012). Nutraceutical and pharmaceutical compositions and
use thereof for the treatment, co-treatment or prevention of inflammatory disorders. US Patent 8158681.
Raharjo, T.J., Chang, W.T., Choi, Y.H., Peltenburg-Looman, A.M.G., and Verpoorte, R. (2004). Olivetol
as product of a polyketide synthase in Cannabis sativa L. Plant Science, 166, 381–385.
Rotherham, D. and Harbison, S. (2010). Differentiation of drug and non-drug Cannabis using a single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) assay. Forensic Science International, 207, 193–197.
Rowan, M.G. and Fairbairn, J.W. (1977). Cannabinoid patterns in seedlings of Cannabis sativa L. and their
use in the determination of chemical race. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 29, 491–494.
Russo, E.B. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage
effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1344–1364.
Samuelsson, G. (1999). Drugs of Natural Origin. 4th edn. Stockholm: Swedish Pharmaceutical Press.
Schultes, R.E., Klein, W.M., Plowman, T., and Lockwood, T.E. (1974). Cannabis: an example of taxonomic
neglect. Harvard University Botanical Museum Leaflets, 23, 337–367.
Sirikantaramas, S., Morimoto, S., Shoyama, S., et al. (2004). The gene controlling marijuana psychoactivity. Molecular cloning and heterologous expression of Δ1-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid synthase from
Cannabis sativa L. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 279, 39767–39774.

109

110

CONSTITUENTS, HISTORY, INTERNATIONAL CONTROL, CULTIVATION, AND PHENOTYPES OF CANNABIS

Shoyama, Y., Hirano, H., and Nishioka, I. (1984). Biosynthesis of propyl cannabinoid acid and its biosynthetic relationship with pentyl and methyl cannabinoid acids. Phytochemistry, 23, 1909–1912.
Shoyama, Y., Tamada, T. and Kurihara, K., et al. (2012). Structure and function of
Δ1-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA) synthase, the enzyme controlling the psychoactivity of
Cannabis sativa. Journal of Molecular Biology, 423, 96–105.
Shoyama, Y., Yagi, M., and Nishioka, I. (1975). Biosynthesis of cannabinoid acids. Phytochemistry, 14,
2189–2192.
Shoyama, Y., Yamauchi, T., and Nishioka, I. (1970) Cannabis. V. Cannabigerolic acid monomethyl ether
and cannabinolic acid. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin (Tokyo), 18, 1327–1332.
Small, E. and Beckstead, H.D. (1973). Common cannabinoid phenotypes in 350 stocks of Cannabis.
Lloydia, 36, 144–165.
Small, E. and Cronquist, A. (1976). A practical and natural taxonomy for Cannabis. Taxon, 25, 405–435.
Stout, J.M., Boubakir, Z., Ambrose, S.J., Purves, R.W., and Page, J.E. (2012). The hexanoyl-CoA precursor for cannabinoid biosynthesis is formed by an acyl-activating enzyme in Cannabis sativa trichomes.
The Plant Journal, 71, 353–365.
Taura, F., Morimoto, S., and Shoyama, Y. (1995). Cannabinerolis acid, a cannabinoid from Cannabis
sativa. Phytochemistry, 39, 457–458.
Taura, F., Morimoto, S., and Shoyama, Y. (1995). First direct evidence for the mechanism of delta-1-­
tetrahydrocannabinolic acid biosynthesis. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 38, 9766–9767.
Taura, F., Morimoto, S., and Shoyama, Y. (1996). Purification and characterization of cannabidiolic-acid
synthase from Cannabis sativa L. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 271, 17411–17416.
Taura, F., Sirikantaramas, S., Shoyama, Y., Yoshikai, K., Shoyama, Y., and Morimoto, S. (2007).
Cannabidiolic-acid synthase, the chemotype-determining enzyme in the fiber-type Cannabis sativa.
FEBS Letters, 581, 2929–2934.
Taura, F., Tanaka, S., Taguchi, C., et al. (2009). Characterization of olivetol synthase, a polyketide synthase
putatively involved in cannabinoid biosynthetic pathway. FEBS Letters, 583, 2061–2066.
Toyota, M., Kinugawa, T., Asakawa, Y. (1994). Bibenzyl cannabinoid and bisbibenzyl derivative from the
liverwort Radula perrottetii. Phytochemistry, 37, 859–862.
Toyota, M., Shimamura, T., Ishii, H., Renner, M., Braggins, J. and Asakawa, Y. (2002). New bibenzyl
cannabinoid from the New Zealand liverwort Radula marginata. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin
(Tokyo), 50, 1390–1392.

Part 2

Pharmacology,
Pharmacokinetics,
Metabolism, and Forensics
Roger G. Pertwee

Part 2 Overview
Part 2 contains 11 chapters (Chapters 6–16). The first of these chapters, by
Pertwee and Cascio, summarizes the known pharmacological actions of four
phytocannabinoid constituents of cannabis that have been shown to activate
cannabinoid CB1 and/or CB2 receptors with significant potency: Δ8- and
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin, and cannabinol. This
chapter also presents evidence that cannabinoid CB2 receptors can be
activated by the nonphytocannabinoid constituent of cannabis,
(E)-β-caryophyllene. Chapter 7 by Cascio and Pertwee extends this theme by
describing the known pharmacological actions of nine other phytocannabinoid
constituents of cannabis: (1) cannabichromene; (2) cannabidiol, cannabigerol,
and their propyl analogues, cannabidivarin and cannabigerovarin;
(3) cannabidiolic acid and cannabigerolic acid; and
(4) Δ9-tetrahydrocannabidiolic acid and its propyl analogue,
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid.
In Chapter 8, Szabo summarizes current knowledge of how
neurotransmission is affected by Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol and other
phytocannabinoids both within and outside the brain through their known
actions on cannabinoid and/or noncannabinoid receptors, and identifies some
important neuropharmacological questions about these compounds that still
need to be addressed.
In Chapter 9, Gardner discusses cannabis dependence, and presents
evidence indicating first, that its incidence in humans who take cannabis

112

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

is low, second that it is attributable primarily to the main psychoactive
constituent of cannabis, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, and third, that two other
phytocannabinoid constituents of cannabis could well possess anti-addictive
efficacy.
In Chapter 10, Patel, Hill, and Hillard present current knowledge
about the adverse and/or potentially beneficial effects that cannabis,
tetrahydrocannabinol, and other cannabinoids have both on anxiety
and mood, and on anxiety and mood disorders such as panic attacks,
posttraumatic stress disorder, and depression. The chapter also mentions
what has already been discovered about how cannabis and certain individual
phytocannabinoids interact with the endocrine system, for example, to alter
levels of glucocorticoid, thyroid and growth hormones, and of melatonin.
In Chapter 11, O’Sullivan reviews the known effects on the cardiovascular
system, mainly of cannabis and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, but also of
cannabinol, cannabidiol, tetrahydrocannabivarin, and cannabigerol, the
cardiovascular effects of which have been much less investigated than those of
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Both in vivo and in vitro data obtained from human
or animal experiments are presented.
In Chapter 12, Duncan and Izzo describe both how cannabis and individual
phytocannabinoids can affect the functioning of the gastrointestinal tract,
and preclinical and clinical evidence that some of these substances might be
effective against gastrointestinal disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome,
inflammatory bowel disease, and colon cancer.
In Chapter 13, Stuart, Leishman, and Bradshaw consider the effects of
cannabis and tetrahydrocannabinol on human and nonhuman reproductive
function and sexual behavior in males and females, and on pregnancy and
birth outcomes. The mechanisms underlying some of these effects are also
discussed, as is the involvement in these effects of the endocrine system, and
the part played by cannabinoid receptors in reproductive function.
In Chapter 14, Cabral, Raborn, and Ferreira outline how the
phytocannabinoids, tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabinol, and cannabidiol, affect
the immune system. As well as discussing their immunomodulatory effects, this
chapter also considers the anti-inflammatory effects these three compounds
produce both in vitro and in vivo, effects of tetrahydrocannabinol on host
resistance to viral, bacterial, and fungal infections, and the part played by
cannabinoid receptors, particularly CB2 receptors, in immunomodulation.
Chapter 15 by McPartland and Russo includes descriptions of the known
pharmacological effects of some of the flavonoid and terpenoid constituents
of cannabis, and on pharmacological interactions that have been found to
occur between phytocannabinoid and terpenoid constituents of cannabis, and
indeed, between certain phytocannabinoids.
Finally, Chapter 16 by Huestis and Smith presents what is currently
known about the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination of
phytocannabinoids following their administration to humans in cannabis,
in cannabis extracts, or as pure compounds (e.g., tetrahydrocannabinol) by

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

one or other of a wide range of different routes, as indicated by the levels
of these compounds or their metabolites measured in plasma, urine, feces,
oral fluid, sweat, or hair. Possible answers to the questions both of how best
to detect cannabinoids for forensic purposes, and of how best to assess the
length of time before such testing that the most recent exposure to cannabis/
cannabinoids occurred, are also considered.

113

Chapter 6

Known Pharmacological Actions
of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and
of Four Other Chemical Constituents
of Cannabis that Activate Cannabinoid
Receptors
Roger G. Pertwee and Maria Grazia Cascio

6.1 Introduction
Cannabis is the unique natural source of a set of chemicals known as phytocannabinoids (ElSohly
et al. 2005), and it is one of these phytocannabinoids, (−)-trans-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(Δ9-THC; Fig. 6.1), that is primarily responsible for producing the well-documented effects on
perception, mood, emotion, and cognition that together constitute the psychotropic effects of
cannabis (Pertwee 1988). The finding that Δ9-THC is the main psychoactive constituent of cannabis prompted a search for the pharmacological basis for its psychotropic effects, and this led
to three further important discoveries: first, of two new G protein-coupled receptors that were
named cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1) and type 2 (CB2); second, that these receptors can both
be activated by Δ9-THC; and third, that this phytocannabinoid produces many of its effects on
brain function by activating the CB1 receptor (Howlett et al. 2002; Pertwee 1997, 2005).
As discussed in greater detail elsewhere (Howlett et al. 2002; Pertwee 2005), cannabinoid
CB1 receptors are found mainly at the terminals of central and peripheral neurons, where they
usually mediate inhibition of ongoing release of a number of different excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters. The distribution of these receptors within the central nervous system is
such that their activation can affect processes such as cognition and memory, alter the control
of motor function, and induce signs of analgesia. CB1 receptors are also expressed by certain
non-neuronal cells, including immune cells. As to cannabinoid CB2 receptors, these are located
predominantly in immune cells and, when activated, they can modulate immune cell migration
and cytokine release both outside and within the brain (Cabral and Staab 2005; Howlett et al.
2002; Pertwee et al. 2010). There is also evidence that CB2 receptors are expressed by some neurons in the brain and elsewhere (Pertwee et al. 2010). However, the role of neuronal CB2 receptors remains to be established. There is evidence too, first, that CB1 receptors can signal through
both Gi/o and Gs proteins, second, that CB1 receptor agonism can cause Gi/o protein-mediated
activation of A-type and inwardly rectifying potassium currents, and inhibition of N-type and
P/Q-type calcium currents, and third, that either CB1 or CB2 receptor agonism can lead to Gi/o
protein-mediated inhibition of adenylyl cyclase and activation of mitogen-activated protein
kinase (Howlett 2005; Howlett et al. 2002; Pertwee 2005). Cannabinoid receptors can be activated
not only by exogenously administered compounds, but also by endogenous cannabinoids such as

116

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

OH

OH

O

O

(–)-Δ9-THC

(–)-Δ8-THC

OH

OH

O

O

(–)-Δ9-THCV

CBN

H

H

(E)-BCP

Fig. 6.1 Structures of (−)-trans-Δ9- and (−)-trans-Δ8-tetrahydrocannabinol ((−)-Δ9-THC and
(−)-Δ8-THC), cannabinol (CBN), (−)-trans-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin ((−)-Δ9-THCV), and
(E)-β-caryophyllene ((E)-BCP).

N-arachidonoylethanolamine (anandamide) and 2-arachidonoyl glycerol that are synthesized by
neurons and other cells and are known as endocannabinoids (Howlett et al. 2002; Pertwee 2005).
This review focuses on Δ9-THC, and on four other constituents of growing and/or harvested
cannabis that have been discovered to activate CB 1 and/or CB2 receptors: the phytocannabinoids, cannabinol (CBN), (−)-trans-delta-8-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ8-THC) and (−)-trans-delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin (Δ9-THCV), and the sesquiterpene, (E)-β-caryophyllene ((E)-BCP)
(Fig. 6.1). It begins with a brief description of the in vivo and in vitro bioassays that have been
used to investigate the ability of these compounds to activate cannabinoid receptors.

6.2 Bioassays for measuring drug-induced activation

of cannabinoid receptors in vitro or in vivo
Two in vitro bioassays that are particularly widely used to provide a measure of cannabinoid
receptor activation, exploit the ability of CB1 and CB2 receptors to signal through Gi/o proteins by
monitoring the ability of a compound either to increase [35S]GTPγS binding to cell membranes
or to inhibit forskolin-induced stimulation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP) production by whole cells (Howlett et al. 2002; Pertwee 1999; 2005). The strength (efficacy) with which
an active compound (agonist) induces receptor activation (agonism) in these assays is usually
determined by measuring the size of the maximal response that it can induce (Emax), whereas an
indication of its potency is usually obtained by establishing the concentration (EC50) at which it
produces a half- maximal response.

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

A third frequently used in vitro bioassay measures the ability of putative cannabinoid receptor
agonists to produce complete displacement, from specific binding sites in cannabinoid receptorexpressing membranes, of an established cannabinoid CB1 and/or CB2 receptor ligand that has
been radiolabeled with tritium (Howlett et al. 2002; Pertwee 1999, 2005). Tritiated cannabinoids
often used in such experiments are [3H]CP55940 and [3H]R(+)-WIN55212, which bind to both
CB1 and CB2 receptors, the CB1-selective ligand, [3H]SR141716A, and the CB2-selective ligand,

Table 6.1 Examples of Ki values of Δ9-THC, Δ8-THC, CBN, Δ9-THCV, and (E)-BCP for the in vitro
displacement of [3H]CP55940, [3H]HU-243, or [3H]SR141716A from CB1- and CB2-specific binding
sites
Displacing compound

CB1 Ki (nM)

CB2 Ki (nM)

Reference

Δ9-THC

5.05

3.13

Iwamura et al. 2001

8.33a

1.73b

Iwamura et al. 2001

13.5c

6.8c

Iwamura et al. 2001

21; 40.7c

36.4

Showalter et al. 1996

35.3c

3.9c

Rinaldi-Carmona et al. 1994

39.5d, e

40e

Bayewitch et al. 1996

47.7c

ND

Booker et al. 2009

53.3

75.3

Felder et al. 1995

66.5c,e; 80.3d,e

32.2 e

Rhee et al. 1997

44c

44

Huffman et al. 1999

47.6c

39.3a

Busch-Petersen et al. 1996

120.2

100

MacLennan et al. 1998

129.3c

ND

Booker et al. 2009

392.2c,e; 211.2d,e

126.4e

Rhee et al. 1997

326

96.3

Showalter et al. 1996

1130

301

Felder et al. 1995

46.6 a

ND

Pertwee et al. 2007

75.4a

62.8

Thomas et al. 2005

286c,f

ND

Hill et al. 2010

ND

145

Bolognini et al. 2012

ND

225

Bolognini et al. 2010

>10,000

155

Gertsch et al. 2008

Δ8-THC

CBN

Δ9-THCV

(E)-BCP

Abbreviations: CBN, cannabinol;Δ9-THC, (−)-trans-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol; Δ8-THC, (−)-trans-Δ8-tetrahydrocannabinol;
Δ9-THCV, (−)-trans-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin; (E)-BCP, (E)-β-caryophyllene; ND, not determined.
Experiments performed with: a mouse brain (CB1) or mouse spleen (CB2) membranes; b membranes from cultured cells
transfected with mouse cannabinoid receptors; c rat brain (CB1) or rat spleen (CB2) membranes; d membranes from cultured cells transfected with rat cannabinoid receptors; e [3H]HU-243; f [3H]SR141716A. All other data are from experiments performed with [3H]CP55940 and/or with membranes from cultured cells transfected with human cannabinoid
receptors. See Fig. 6.1 for the structures of the compounds listed in this table.

117

118

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

[3H]SR144528. The potency of an active compound in these binding assays is expressed either
as the concentration (IC50) at which it produces 50% displacement of one of these tritiated cannabinoids or as its Ki value (Table 6.1), which can be calculated from its IC50 value. Ki values are
directly related to the affinities of ligands for their receptors, whereas IC50 values are, of course,
inversely related to these affinity values.
Moving on to quantitative in vivo bioassays for cannabinoid receptor agonists, these are usually
performed with mice or rats, although sometimes with other species, including dogs, pigeons,
and nonhuman primates (Howlett et al. 2002). Apparent CB1 receptor-mediated effects that most
often serve as measured responses to drugs in such bioassays are:
◆

◆

◆

hypolocomotion, hypothermia, antinociception, and catalepsy which, when measured in parallel using mice, constitute the widely used “mouse tetrad” test
subjective effects which can be distinguished by animals in “drug discrimination” assays from
effects produced by substances that do not activate cannabinoid receptors
impairment of learning and memory as measured, for example, in radial mazes or in the
Morris water maze.

Antinociception in the mouse tetrad is most often monitored using tail-flick or hot-plate tests,
which provide measures of relief from acute pain induced by heat, whereas catalepsy is often
monitored by noting the length of time that mice remain immobile when subjected to a “ring test”
that was originally developed in 1972 (Pertwee 1972), or to a “bar test.”
As to in vivo indications of CB2 receptor activation that are exploited in bioassays, these include
the reduction of signs of inflammatory paw pain induced in rats or mice by an intraplantar injection of carrageenan or formalin, and the reduction of rat or mouse paw edema induced by intraplantar carrageenan (Bolognini et al. 2010; Guindon and Hohmann 2008).
Importantly, confirmatory evidence that apparent signs of cannabinoid receptor binding or
activation observed in CB1 or CB2 receptor-transfected cells, or in membranes obtained from
these cells, are indeed cannabinoid receptor-mediated can be obtained by establishing whether
these signs are, or are not, detectable in untransfected cells. Activation of CB1 or CB2 receptors
should also be undetectable when an in vitro or in vivo bioassay is performed with animals or tissues from which these receptors have been genetically deleted (Howlett et al. 2002). In addition, a
compound that can truly activate CB1 or CB2 receptor in an in vivo or in vitro bioassay is expected
to be antagonized with appropriate potency by a CB1-selective antagonist such as SR141716A,
AM251, or AM281 and/or by a CB2-selective antagonist such as SR144528 or AM630 (Howlett
et al. 2002; Pertwee 2005).

6.3 Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol
6.3.1 Δ9-THC can activate CB1 and CB2 receptors

That Δ9-THC can activate CB1 receptors in vivo is strongly supported by the findings, first, that
it can, in mice, suppress locomotor activity and induce hypothermia, immobility (catalepsy) in
the ring test, and antinociception in the tail-flick test, all at similar doses (Martin et al. 1991), and,
second, that its ability to produce each of these tetrad test effects is readily blocked by the selective
CB1 receptor antagonist, SR141716A (Varvel et al. 2005; Wiley et al. 2001). In addition, Δ9-THC
has been found not to affect locomotor activity or to induce hypothermia or ring immobility in
mice bred on a C57BL/6J background from which the CB1 receptor has been genetically deleted
(Di Marzo et al. 2000; Zimmer et al. 1999). This genetic deletion also abolished Δ9-THC-induced
antinociception in the hot-plate test, although unexpectedly, not in the tail-flick test.

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

There is evidence as well that Δ9-THC can activate CB2 receptors. Thus, for example, experiments with female mice have shown that Δ9-THC shares the ability of the CB2-selective agonist,
JWH-133, to decrease the growth rate of xenografts derived from cells that had been isolated
from a CB1- and CB2-expressing breast cancer tumor, and also, that this effect of Δ 9-THC, and
of JWH-133, can be reduced by the CB2-selective antagonist SR144528 but not by SR141716A
(Caffarel et al. 2010). In addition, there has been a report that Δ9-THC can reduce signs of paw
pain in a rat model of arthritis and that this reduction can be attenuated by SR144528 (Cox et al.
2007). This antinociceptive effect of Δ9-THC was also decreased by SR141716A, suggesting that
it was produced through the activation of both CB1 and CB2 receptors. It is noteworthy too that,
as expected for a CB2 receptor agonist, Δ9-THC can decrease carrageenan-induced mouse paw
edema (Wise et al. 2008). However, the likely involvement of CB2 receptors in this effect was not
investigated.
Δ9-THC also behaves as both a CB1 and a CB2 receptor agonist in vitro. This is indicated, for
example, by its ability to stimulate [35S]GTPγS binding or to inhibit forskolin-induced production of cyclic AMP with significant potency in tissues that express CB1 receptors, either naturally or after CB1 receptor transfection (Pertwee 1997; 1999). These effects can be produced by
concentrations of Δ9-THC in the low nanomolar range, although even so, with a potency that is
usually less than that displayed by certain other established CB1/CB2 receptor agonists such as
CP55940 and HU-210 (Pertwee 1997, 1999). Confirmatory evidence that some of these in vitro
effects of Δ9-THC are CB1 receptor-mediated comes from the finding that they can be prevented
by genetic deletion of the CB1 receptor in the [35S]GTPγS binding assay performed with mouse
cerebellar homogenates (Monory et al. 2002), and that cell lines that do not express CB1 receptors
naturally, only exhibit signs of Δ9-THC-induced CB1 receptor activation in the cyclic AMP assay
if they have first been transfected with this receptor (Matsuda et al. 1990; Slipetz et al. 1995). As
expected from the results obtained in these functional in vitro bioassays, it has also been found
that Δ9-THC can fully displace cannabinoid receptor ligands such as [3H]CP55940 from specific
binding sites on cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors with Ki values in the low nanomolar range
(Table 6.1). These Ki values are similar for each of these receptors, but significantly higher than
those of the synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists, CP55940 and HU-210 (Howlett et al. 2002;
Pertwee 1997), an indication that Δ9-THC has less affinity than these other compounds for both
CB1 and CB2 receptors.
6.3.2 Δ9-THC is a cannabinoid receptor partial agonist

In several cannabinoid receptor-containing tissue preparations, the maximal sizes (Emax values)
of apparent CB1 or CB2 receptor-mediated effects produced by Δ9-THC are well below those of
certain other established CB1/CB2 receptor agonists. This is an indication that Δ9-THC possesses
less CB1 and CB2 efficacy than these other agonists and should, therefore, be classified as a partial
agonist for these receptors (Pertwee 1997; 1999). Cannabinoids that have been found to display
greater CB1 receptor efficacy than Δ9-THC, in some in vitro bioassays, include the 11-hydroxy
primary metabolite of Δ9-THC (Matsuda et al. 1990), and the synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists, CP55940 and HU-210 (Pertwee 1997; 1999). They also include the synthetic cannabinoid,
nabilone (Matsuda et al. 1990), which like Δ9-THC, has been a licensed medicine for many years
(Pertwee and Thomas 2009).
Importantly, cannabis is increasingly being taken recreationally together with synthetic “designer drugs” that can activate CB1 receptors much more strongly than Δ9-THC (Seely et al. 2012).
Just two notable examples of these compounds are JWH-018 and JWH-073, both of which have

119

120

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

been reported to stimulate [35S]GTPγS binding to mouse brain membranes with markedly greater
efficacy than Δ9-THC (Brents et al. 2011; 2012). Pharmacological and toxicological consequences
of the recreational use of CB1 receptor agonists that possess significantly higher efficacy than
­Δ9-THC have still to be fully explored.
6.3.3 Δ9-THC can both activate and block CB1 and CB2 receptors

Since Δ9-THC displays relatively low efficacy as an agonist at CB1 and CB2 receptors, it is to be
expected that the maximum size of the effect that it can produce when it activates these receptors will be greatly influenced by the proportion of them that are in an “active state” (Bolognini
et al. 2012), as well as by their expression level and coupling efficiency, and hence will not be the
same in all cannabinoid receptor-expressing tissues. Thus, for example, the size of the maximal
effect that Δ9-THC can produce in tissues in which cannabinoid receptors are particularly highly
expressed, or in which they signal with particularly high efficiency, is likely to be quite large.
However, in tissues in which cannabinoid receptors are poorly expressed or signal with low efficiency, Δ9-THC could well fail to produce any detectable sign of cannabinoid receptor activation
at all. Indeed, since it would still be expected to possess unchanged affinity for these receptors,
Δ9-THC might possibly antagonize the effects of higher efficacy cannabinoid receptor agonists in
such tissues.
It is noteworthy, therefore, that in some in vitro investigations, the maximal sizes of apparent
cannabinoid CB1 receptor-mediated effects of Δ9-THC have been found to match those of higher
efficacy agonists such as CP55940 (Pertwee 1997, 1999), whereas in other investigations, Δ9-THC
has been found to produce signs of antagonism, or even of inverse agonism, at CB1 or CB2 receptors either in vitro or in vivo. More specifically, Paronis et al. (2012) have found that in mice, a
maximal hypothermic dose of Δ9-THC (30 mg kg−1 s.c.) produced a significant rightward shift
in the log dose–response curve of the cannabinoid receptor agonist, AM2389, for its production
of hypothermia. By itself, Δ9-THC behaved as a partial agonist, displaying less hypothermic efficacy than AM2389. There has also been a report that in a mouse model in which CP55940 and
R-(+)-WIN55212 each produced an apparent anxiolytic effect, Δ9-THC shared the ability of the
CB1-selective antagonists, SR141716A and AM251, to induce signs of increased anxiety (Patel
and Hillard 2006). In addition, in other experiments, Δ9-THC was found to reduce stimulation of
[35S]GTPγS binding to rat cerebellar membranes produced by R-(+)-WIN55212 (Sim et al. 1996),
to attenuate R-(+)-WIN55212- and 2-arachidonoyl glycerol-induced inhibition of glutamatergic
synaptic transmission induced in rat or mouse cultured hippocampal neurons (Kelley and Thayer
2004; Shen and Thayer 1999; Straiker and Mackie 2005), or to antagonize CB2 receptor-mediated
inhibition of cyclic AMP production in CB2-transfected cells (Bayewitch et al. 1996). Moreover, in
another investigation, it was found that although Δ9-THC did, as expected, stimulate [35S]GTPγS
binding to membranes obtained from CB1-transfected cells, it inhibited such binding to membranes obtained from CB2-transfected cells (Govaerts et al. 2004), an indication that Δ
­ 9-THC can
behave as a CB2 receptor inverse agonist. There have also been in vitro investigations in which
­Δ9-THC has been found to produce no detectable CB 2 receptor-mediated inhibition of cyclic
AMP production (Pertwee 1997, 1999).
6.3.4 CB1 and CB2 receptor-independent actions of Δ9-THC

Among the known CB1 and CB2 receptor-independent actions of Δ9-THC (Table 6.2 and 6.3), are
several that it can display at submicromolar concentrations in at least some bioassays and that are,
therefore, likely to reduce its CB1 and CB2 receptor selectivity. Thus, Δ9-THC has been reported:

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

Table 6.2 A selection of receptors and ion channels that Δ9-THC has been reported to target
in vitro
Concentration
of Δ9-THC§

Pharmacological target and effect

Reference

Receptors and channels
<1 µM

1–10 µM

>10 µM

CB1 receptor (A or B)

¶

CB2 receptor (A or B)

¶

GPR18 (A)

McHugh et al. 2012

GPR55 (A)*

Pertwee 2010†

5-HT3A ligand-gated ion channel (B)

Pertwee 2010†

Glycine ligand-gated ion channels,
including α1 and α1 β1 (P)

Pertwee 2010†

TRPA1 cation channel (A)*; TRPV2 cation
channel (A)*; TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis and Di Marzo 2010†;
De Petrocellis et al. 2008, 2011

PPARγ nuclear receptor (A)

O’Sullivan et al. 2005

Putative non-CB1, non-CB2, non-TRPV1
receptors on capsaicin-sensitive
perivascular sensory neurons mediating
CGRP release (+)

Zygmunt et al. 2002

β-adrenoceptor (P)

Pertwee 2010†

µ-opioid receptors (D)

Pertwee 2010†

Allosteric modulation of μ- and δ-opioid
receptors (−)

Pertwee 2010†

GPR55 (A or B)

Anavi-Goffer et al. 2012

PPARγ nuclear receptor (A)

O’Sullivan et al. 2005

TRPV3 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012†

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012†

T-type calcium (Cav3) voltage gated ion
channels (−)

Pertwee 2010†

Potassium Kv1.2 voltage gated ion
channels (−)

Pertwee 2010†

Conductance in Na+ voltage gated ion
channels (−)

Oz 2006†

Conductance in gap junctions between
cells (−)

Oz 2006†

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis and Di Marzo 2010†

TRPV2 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis and Di Marzo 2010†

Abbreviations: 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; A, activation; B, blockade; CGRP, calcitonin gene-related peptide; D, displacement from binding sites; P, potentiation; PPAR, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor; TRP transient receptor potential; see also footnote to Table 6.1.
(+), enhancement; (−), inhibition; § EC50 or IC50 when this has been determined; † review article; * see also effect of
1–10 µM or of >10 µM; ¶ see this review for further details.

121

122

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Table 6.3 A selection of enzymes and cellular uptake or other processes that Δ9-THC has been
reported to target in vitro
Concentration
of Δ9-THC§

Pharmacological target and effect

Reference

Enzymes
<1 µM

1–10 µM

>10 µM

Phospholipase(s) (+)*

Pertwee 1988†

Lysophosphatidylcholine acyl transferase (−)

Greenberg et al. 1978

Phospholipase(s) (+)

Pertwee 1988†

Lipoxygenase (−)

Evans 1991

Na+-K+-ATPase activity (−)

Pertwee 1988†

Mg2+-ATPase activity (±)

Pertwee 1988†

CYP1A1 (−); CYP1A2 (−); CYP1B1 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2010

CYP2B6 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011b

CYP2C9 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2012

Norepinephrine-induced melatonin biosynthesis (−)

Koch et al. 2006

Monoamine oxidase activity (−)

Pertwee 1988†

Synaptic conversion of tyrosine to noradrenaline
and dopamine (+)

Pertwee 1988†

Cyclooxygenase (−)

Evans 1991

CYP2A6 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011b

CYP2D6 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011c

CYP3A4 (−); CYP3A5 (−); CYP3A7 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011a

Transporters and cellular uptake
<1 µM

1–10 µM

Adenosine uptake by cultured microglia and
macrophages (−)

Carrier et al. 2006

Synaptosomal uptake of dopamine (±)*

Pertwee 1988†

Synaptosomal uptake of noradrenaline (+)*

Pertwee 1988†

Synaptosomal uptake of 5-hydroxytryptamine (−)*

Pertwee 1988†

Cellular uptake of anandamide (−)

Rakhshan et al. 2000

Synaptosomal uptake of dopamine (−)

Pertwee 1988†

Synaptosomal uptake of noradrenaline (−)

Pertwee 1988†

Synaptosomal uptake of 5-hydroxytryptamine (±)

Pertwee 1988†

Synaptosomal uptake of γ-aminobutyric acid (−)

Pertwee 1988†

Synaptosomal uptake of choline (−)

Pertwee 1988†

Other actions or effects
1–10 µM

>10 µM

Oxidative stress (−)

Marsicano et al. 2002

Human keratinocyte proliferation (−)

Wilkinson and Williamson 2007

Fluidity of synaptic plasma membranes (+); (−)

Hillard et al. 1985

Abbreviations: (+),enhancement; (−), inhibition; see also footnote to Table 6.1. § EC50 or IC50 when this has been determined; * see also effect of 1–10 µM or of >10 µM; †review article.

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

to inhibit 5-HT3A-mediated currents induced by 5-HT in human embryonic kidney 293
(HEK293) cells stably transfected with the functional 3A subunit of the human 5-HT3 receptor
(IC50 = 38 nM), possibly by acting through an allosteric mechanism (Barann et al. 2002)
to enhance the activation of glycine receptors naturally expressed in rat isolated ventral tegmental area neurons (EC50 = 115 nM), and of both homomeric α1 and heteromeric α1β1
subunits of human glycine receptors transfected into Xenopus laevis oocytes (EC50 = 86 nM
and 73 nM, respectively), again possibly in an allosteric manner (Hejazi et al. 2006)
to elevate calcium levels in HEK293 cells stably overexpressing high levels of the transient
receptor potential (TRP) cation channels, TRPA1 or TRPV2 (EC50 = 230 nM and 650 nM,
respectively), and to desensitize TRPV2 cation channels to activation by lysophosphatidylcholine (IC50 = 800 nM) (De Petrocellis et al. 2008, 2011)
to reduce elevations of intracellular calcium levels induced by the TRPM8 agonists, icilin or
menthol, in HEK293 cells stably overexpressing recombinant rat TRPM8 cation channels
(IC50 = 160 nM and 150 nM, respectively (De Petrocellis et al. 2008; 2011)
to activate the nuclear receptor, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ),
at concentrations of 100 nM and above in a luciferase reporter gene assay performed with
HEK293 cells transiently expressing this receptor (O’Sullivan et al. 2005)
to activate the G protein-coupled receptor, GPR18 in HEK293 cells transfected with this receptor (EC50 = 960 nM; McHugh et al. 2012).

In some in vitro investigations, submicromolar concentrations of Δ9-THC have also been found to
activate GPR55 in HEK293 cells transfected with this deorphanized receptor, both in a β-arrestin
assay, albeit with rather low efficacy (Yin et al. 2009), and in a [35S]GTPγS binding assay (EC50 =
8 nM; Ryberg et al. 2007). In other in vitro investigations, however, Δ9-THC induced signs of
GPR55 activation only at concentrations in the micromolar range (Anavi-Goffer et al. 2012;
Lauckner et al. 2008), or lacked detectable activity as a GPR55 agonist altogether (Pertwee 2010;
Pertwee et al. 2010). It is also noteworthy that in one of these investigations (Anavi-Goffer et al.
2012), a concentration of Δ9-THC (1 µM) that did not seem to activate GPR55, induced a significant downward shift in the log concentration–response curve of an endogenous agonist for this
receptor (L-α-lysophosphatidylinositol), when the measured response was stimulation of extracellular receptor kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2) phosphorylation by human GPR55-transfected HEK293
cells.

6.4 Δ8-tetrahydrocannabinol
Although the pharmacological profile of Δ8-THC (Fig. 6.1) has been little investigated, there is
evidence that it does share the ability of Δ9-THC to target cannabinoid CB1 receptors as a partial agonist. Thus, it has been reported to inhibit forskolin-induced production of cyclic AMP
in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells transfected with CB1 receptors with a potency slightly
less than that of Δ9-THC, but an efficacy similar to that of Δ9-THC and hence less than that of
CP55940 (Gérard et al. 1991; Matsuda et al. 1990). This effect of Δ8-THC was presumably CB1
receptor-mediated as it was not observed in untransfected CHO cells. In addition, it has been
reported first, that Δ8-THC can fully displace [3H]CP55940 from specific binding sites on cannabinoid CB1 receptors with a similar potency to Δ9-THC (Table 6.1), and second, that it also
displays similar potency to Δ9-THC in vivo in the mouse tetrad test (Martin et al. 1993). It has also
been found that 11-hydroxy-Δ8-THC, which is a primary metabolite of Δ8-THC (Yamamoto et al.
2003), can bind to rat CB1 and human CB2 (hCB2) receptors present in membranes obtained from

123

124

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

African green monkey kidney (COS-7) cells transfected with these receptors, with Ki values in the
low nanomolar range (Rhee et al. 1997). Other results obtained in this investigation showed that
11-hydroxy-Δ8-THC could also inhibit forskolin-induced cyclic AMP production by these cells.
Interestingly, however, it displayed much lower CB2 than CB1 efficacy as an agonist in the cyclic
AMP assay, and yet higher CB2 than CB1 affinity in the binding assays.
There is evidence too that Δ8-THC can induce ataxia in dogs and cannabis-like psychopharmacological effects in human subjects and rhesus monkeys, albeit with less potency than Δ 9-THC
(Pertwee 1988). However, whether or not any of these in vivo effects of Δ8-THC can be opposed
by a selective CB1 receptor antagonist has yet to be investigated. It is noteworthy, therefore, that
there have been reports first, that intraperitoneal (i.p.) administration of a low dose of Δ 8-THC
can increase food intake by mice, and that this effect can be prevented by the CB1-selective
antagonist, SR141716A (Avraham et al. 2004), and second, that antinociceptive effects induced
in a mouse model of acute pain by intracerebroventricular or intrathecal injections of Δ8-THC,
or indeed of Δ9-THC, can be blocked by this antagonist when it is administered intracerebroventricularly or intraperitoneally (Welch et al. 1998). Finally, again like Δ9-THC, Δ8-THC has been
found to displace [3H]CP55940 from CB2 receptors no less potently than it displaces this tritiated
ligand from CB1 receptors (Table 6.1). The likely possibility that Δ8-THC also activates CB2 receptors still needs to be investigated, as indeed does the extent to which Δ8-THC has Δ9-THC-like
CB1 and CB2 receptor-independent modes of action.

6.5 Cannabinol
CBN (Fig. 6.1) has been found to bind less potently than Δ8- or Δ9-THC to CB1 and CB2 receptors, and to possess slightly higher CB2 than CB1 affinity (Table 6.1). In addition, it has been found
to display lower efficacy than Δ9-THC as a CB1 receptor agonist in vitro in both [ 35S]GTPγS
and cyclic AMP assays performed with CB1-transfected CHO cells, mouse N18TG2 cells, or rat
or mouse brain tissue (Pertwee 1999). There has also been one report that CBN activates CB 2
receptors with greater efficacy than Δ9-THC in the cyclic AMP assay (Rhee et al. 1997), although
another report that it behaves as a CB2 receptor inverse agonist in the [35S]GTPγS binding assay
(MacLennan et al. 1998). There is evidence as well that CBN can activate CB1 receptors in vivo.
Thus, it has been found that CBN shares the ability of Δ9-THC to suppress acetic acid-induced
abdominal stretching behavior in mice and that this effect of CBN, like that of Δ9-THC, can be
blocked by SR141716A, but not by SR144528 (Booker et al. 2009). SR141716A has also been
reported to prevent increases in food consumption induced in rats by CBN (Farrimond et al.
2012).
Interestingly, 11-hydroxy-CBN seems to target both CB1 and CB2 receptors with greater potency than CBN (Table 6.1), since it has been reported to bind to rat CB1 and hCB2 receptors with Ki
values of 38.0 and 26.6 nM, respectively (Rhee et al. 1997). This 11-hydroxy metabolite of CBN
(Yamamoto et al. 2003), has also been found: (1) to activate CB1 receptors with significant potency
(EC50 = 58.1 nM), in the cyclic AMP assay performed with rat CB1-transfected COS-7 cells, but
(2) to display little activity as an agonist in this assay (EC50 > 10 µM) when it was performed with
hCB2-transfected COS-7 cells, behaving instead as an antagonist of the potent synthetic CB1/CB2
receptor agonist, HU-210 (Rhee et al. 1997). Δ9-THC behaved similarly to 11-hydroxy-CBN in
this investigation, displaying significant potency as a CB1 receptor agonist (EC50 = 11 nM) but not
as a CB2 receptor agonist (EC50 > 1 µM).
Finally, submicromolar concentrations of CBN have also been found to inhibit CYPA1,
CYP1A2, and CYP1B1 enzymes (IC50 = 740 nM, 188 nM and 278 nM, respectively), to desensitize

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

Table 6.4 A selection of receptors, ion channels, enzymes and cellular uptake or other processes
that CBN or Δ9-THCV has been reported to target in vitro
Compound and its
concentration§

Pharmacological target and effect

Reference

Receptors and channels
CBN

<1 µM

1–10 µM

>10 µM

Δ9-THCV

<1 µM

1–10 µM

CB1 receptor (A)

Pertwee 1999†; Rhee et al. 1997

CB2 receptor (A)

Pertwee 1999†; Rhee et al. 1997;

TRPA1 cation channel (A)*

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV1 cation channel (A) (low efficacy)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV3 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012†

Conductance in gap junctions between
cells (−)

Oz 2006†

Putative non-CB1, non-CB2, non-TRPV1
receptors on capsaicin-sensitive perivascular
sensory neurons mediating CGRP release (+)

Zygmunt et al. 2002

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis and Di Marzo 2010†

TRPV2 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis and Di Marzo 2010†

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

CB1 receptor (B)

¶

CB2 receptor (A)

¶

TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

GPR55 (A or B)

Anavi-Goffer et al. 2012

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV2 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV3 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012†

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012†

Enzymes
CBN

<1 µM

CYP1A1 (−); CYP1A2 (−); CYP1B1 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2010

1–10 µM

Phospholipase(s) (+)

Burstein et al. 1982

Lipoxygenase (−)

Evans 1991

CYP2B6 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011b

CYP2C9 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2012

Cyclooxygenase (−)

Evans 1991

CYP3A4 (−); CYP3A5 (−); CYP3A7 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011a

CYP2A6 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011b

CYP2D6 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011c

>10 µM

125

126

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Table 6.4 (continued) A selection of receptors, ion channels, enzymes and cellular uptake or other
processes that CBN or Δ9-THCV has been reported to target in vitro
Compound and its
concentration§

Pharmacological target and effect

Reference

Norepinephrine-induced melatonin
biosynthesis (−)

Koch et al. 2006

Transporters and cellular uptake
CBN

1–10 µM

>10 µM

Synaptosomal uptake of dopamine (−)

Poddar and Dewey 1980

Synaptosomal uptake of noradrenaline (−)*

Poddar and Dewey 1980

Synaptosomal uptake of noradrenaline (−)

Banerjee et al. 1975

Synaptosomal uptake of
5-hydroxytryptamine (−)

Banerjee et al. 1975

Synaptosomal uptake of γ-aminobutyric
acid (−)

Banerjee et al. 1975

Other actions or effects
CBN

1–10 µM

>10 µM

Oxidative stress (−)

Marsicano et al. 2002

Human keratinocyte proliferation (−)

Wilkinson and Williamson 2007

Fluidity of synaptic plasma
membranes (+); (−)

Hillard et al. 1985

Abbreviations: A, activation; B, blockade; TRP transient receptor potential; see also footnote to Table 6.1.
(+), enhancement; (−), inhibition; § EC50 or IC50 when this has been determined; † review article; * see also effect of
1–10 µM or of >10 µM; ¶ see this review for further details.

TRPA1 cation channels to activation by allyl isothiocyanate (IC50 = 400 nM) and, like Δ9-THC,
to activate TRPA1 (EC50 = 180 nM), and block TRPM8 cation channels (IC 50 = 210 nM) (De
Petrocellis et al. 2011; Yamaori et al. 2010; see also Table 6.4). At higher concentrations, CBN can
target additional CYP enzymes and TRP cation channels, as well as other receptors or enzymes,
and transmitter uptake processes (Table 6.4).

6.6 Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin
6.6.1 Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin is a CB2 receptor partial agonist

Δ9-THCV (Fig. 6.1) can fully displace [3H]CP55940 from specific binding sites in CB2 receptors
located in membranes obtained from hCB2-transfected CHO cells with a potency similar to that
of Δ9-THC (Table 6.1). There is also evidence that Δ9-THCV shares the ability of Δ9-THC both to
inhibit forskolin-induced stimulation of cyclic AMP production by hCB2-transfected CHO cells
and to stimulate [35S]GTPγS binding to membranes obtained from these cells (Bolognini et al.
2010). The mean Emax value of Δ9-THCV was significantly less than that of CP55940 in both these
assays, evidence that it activates CB2 receptors with less efficacy than CP55940 and is, therefore, a
CB2 receptor partial agonist. Neither compound inhibited forskolin-induced stimulation of cyclic
AMP production in CHO cells that had not been transfected with CB2 receptors.
As is to be expected for a partial agonist, the ability of Δ9-THCV to activate CB2 receptors
seems to be influenced by the expression level of these receptors. Thus, it produced a significant

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

stimulation of [35S]GTPγS binding to hCB2 CHO cell membranes in which CB2 receptors were
expressed at a level of 215 pmol mg−1, but no detectable stimulation of such binding to cell membranes in which these receptors were expressed at the lower level of 72.57 pmol mg−1 (Bolognini
et al. 2010). Indeed, Δ9-THCV antagonized CP55940-induced stimulation of [35S]GTPγS binding
to these lower CB2-expressing membranes (Thomas et al. 2005), an indication that Δ9-THCV
possesses the typical mixed agonist-antagonist properties of a partial agonist, inducing signs
of agonism when its receptors are highly expressed, but signs of antagonism when they are less
highly expressed.
It has also been found that Δ9-THCV can stimulate [35S]GTPγS binding to membranes obtained
from mouse spleen, and that such stimulation is not produced by Δ 9-THCV in membranes
obtained from mice from which the CB2 receptor has been genetically deleted (Bolognini et al.
2010). Hence Δ9-THCV can activate CB2 receptors not only in cells that have been transfected
with CB2 receptors but also in a tissue that expresses these receptors naturally. Additionally, it has
been found: (1) that like the CB2-selective agonist, JWH-015, Δ9-THCV can stimulate fibroblastic
colony formation by bone marrow cells, and (2) that this stimulation by Δ9-THCV is reduced by
the CB2-selective antagonist, AM630 (Scutt and Williamson 2007).
There is evidence as well that CB2 receptors can be activated by Δ9-THCV in vivo. This has
come from experiments with mice showing: (1) that this compound resembles established CB2
receptor agonists by displaying an ability to decrease both carrageenan-induced paw edema
and signs of inflammatory pain exhibited in the formalin paw test, and (2) that both these
effects of Δ9-THCV can be attenuated by the CB2-selective antagonist SR144528 (Bolognini
et al. 2010). However, the effect of Δ9-THCV in the second of these bioassays was opposed
by the CB 1 selective antagonist, SR141716A too, and although Δ9-THCV also suppressed
carrageenan-induced hind paw hyperalgesia, this effect was attenuated by neither SR144528
nor SR141716A. In addition, Δ9-THCV attenuated the first and second phases of formalininduced pain behavior at a dose of 5 mg kg−1 i.p., but only the second of these phases at the
lower dose of 1 mg kg−1 i.p. (Bolognini et al. 2010). This is of interest since several established
CB2-selective agonists have been found to suppress only phase 2 of the formalin test (Guindon
and Hohmann 2008).
Further evidence that Δ9-THCV can activate CB2 receptors in vivo comes from the finding that
in mice that had received intrastriatal injections of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), it can produce signs
of neuroprotection similar to those produced by the CB2-selective agonist, HU-308 (García et al.
2011). It has been found too that signs of hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice can be attenuated by Δ8-THCV in a manner that can be opposed by the CB2-selective antagonist, SR144528
(Bátkai et al. 2012). This investigation also showed that Δ8-THCV and 1­ 1-hydroxy-Δ8-THCV display similar potency to Δ9-THCV in vitro, both as CB2 agonists in cyclic AMP assays performed
with hCB2-transfected CHO cells, and as displacers of [3H]CP55940 from specific binding sites in
membranes obtained from these cells.
6.6.2 Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin also targets CB1 receptors

Δ9-THCV can induce a complete displacement of [3H]CP55940 as potently from CB1 receptors
as from CB2 receptors (Table 6.1), and has also been found to displace [3H]R-(+)-WIN55212
and [3H]SR141716A from specific binding sites on mouse brain membranes with about the
same potency as that with which it displaces [3H]CP55940 from these sites (Thomas et al. 2005).
Importantly, however, evidence has also emerged from both in vitro and in vivo experiments that,
at doses at which it activates CB2 receptors, Δ9-THCV behaves as a CB1 receptor antagonist.

127

128

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Turning first to the in vitro evidence, Δ9-THCV has been found:
◆

◆

◆

◆

to produce significant parallel dextral shifts in the log concentration–response curves of
CP55940 and R-(+)-WIN55212 for their stimulation of [35S]GTPγS binding to mouse whole
brain membranes at 1 µM (Pertwee et al. 2007; Thomas et al. 2005)
to produce such antagonism of R-(+)-WIN55212 at concentrations of 100 nM to 5 µM, when
this assay is performed with membranes obtained from mouse cerebellum or piriform cortex
(Dennis et al. 2008)
to share the ability of one established CB1-selective antagonist, SR141716A, to oppose inhibition of electrically evoked contractions of mouse isolated vasa deferentia induced by cannabinoid receptor agonists such as CP55940, R-(+)-WIN55212, and Δ9-THC (Pertwee et al. 1995,
2007; Thomas et al. 2005)
to share the ability of another such antagonist, AM251, to reverse R-(+)-WIN55212-induced
decreases of miniature inhibitory postsynaptic current frequency at mouse cerebellar interneuron–Purkinje cell synapses (Ma et al. 2008).

Interestingly, Δ9-THCV appeared to act solely as a competitive CB1 antagonist in the first of these
investigations, but not in the second one, a difference that merits further investigation. So, too,
does the finding that although the potency that Δ9-THCV displayed as an antagonist of Δ9-THC
in mouse isolated vasa deferentia was very similar to the potency it displayed as an antagonist of
R-(+)-WIN55212 or CP55940 in [35S]GTPγS binding assays performed with mouse whole brain
membranes, the potency with which it antagonized R-(+)-WIN55212 or CP55940 was significantly higher in vasa deferentia than in brain membranes.
When administered by itself, at concentrations of up to 10 µM, Δ9-THCV has been found neither to stimulate nor to inhibit [35S]GTPγS binding to mouse whole brain membranes (Pertwee
et al. 2007). Similar results have been obtained in experiments with membranes obtained from
mouse cerebellum or piriform cortex or from rat cerebral cortex (Dennis et al. 2008; Hill et al.
2010), although in those investigations Δ 9-THCV was found to exert an inhibitory effect on
[35S]GTPγS binding at concentrations above 10 µM. However, in contrast to these findings,
Δ9-THCV has been found to induce signs of CB1 receptor inverse agonism at 10, 100, and 1000
nM in experiments with human CB1 (hCB1) CHO cells, as indicated by its ability to enhance
forskolin-induced stimulation of cyclic AMP production (Bolognini et al. 2010). This effect was
most likely CB1 receptor-mediated since it was not observed in cells that had been pre-incubated
with pertussis toxin, a pretreatment expected to abolish Gi/o protein-linked receptor signaling.
Turning now to evidence that Δ9-THCV can also block CB1 receptors in vivo, this came initially
from experiments with mice showing that, at intravenous (i.v.) doses of 0.3 and/or 3 mg kg−1, both
Δ9-THCV and Δ8-THCV opposed the ability of Δ9-THC to induce antinociception in a mouse
model of acute pain (tail-flick test), and hypothermia (Pertwee et al. 2007). When injected at a
dose of 2 mg kg−1 i.p., Δ9-THCV has also been found to display significant potency as an antagonist both of CP55940-induced antinociception in a rat model of acute pain (hot-plate test), and of
CP55940-induced inhibition of rat locomotor activity (García et al. 2011). In addition, Δ8-THCV,
but not Δ9-THCV, has been reported to antagonize (1) Δ9-THC-induced immobility in the mouse
ring test at 0.3 and 3 mg kg−1 i.v. (Pertwee et al. 2007) and (2) Δ9-THC induced antinociception
in a mouse model of visceral pain at a subcutaneously administered dose of 50 mg kg−1 (Booker
et al. 2009). It is also noteworthy that when injected intraperitoneally at doses of 2, 3, 10, or 30
mg kg−1, Δ9-THCV shares the ability both of AM251 to suppress food consumption and body
weight in nonfasted mice (Riedel et al. 2009), and of SR141716A to reduce signs of motor inhibition displayed by 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned “parkinsonian” rats (García et al. 2011).

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

Although there is no doubt that Δ9-THCV can block CB1 receptors, there is also evidence
that its in vivo administration at high doses can lead to an activation of these receptors. Thus,
Gill et al. (1970) discovered that Δ9-THCV could induce catalepsy in the mouse ring test with
an intraperitoneal potency 4.8 times less than that of Δ9-THC, and it was also found in more
recent experiments that when administered to mice intravenously at doses of 3, 10, 30, and/or 56
mg kg−1: (1) Δ8-THCV could produce both antinociception in the tail-flick test and hypothermia, (2) Δ9-THCV could produce the first but not the second of these effects, and (3) Δ8- and
Δ9-THCV could both produce immobility in the ring test (Pertwee et al. 2007). SR141716A was
found to block Δ8- and Δ9-THCV-induced antinociception in the tail-flick test, although not Δ8or ­Δ9-THCV-induced immobility in the ring test or Δ8-THCV-induced hypothermia, findings
that require further investigation (Pertwee et al. 2007). Further research is also still needed to
investigate why Δ8- and Δ9-THCV block CB1 receptors at low doses both in vivo and in vitro, but
can produce signs of CB1 receptor activation at high doses, in vivo but not in vitro.
6.6.3 CB1 and CB2 receptor-independent actions

of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin

At concentrations above those at which it interacts with CB 1 and CB2 receptors as an agonist
or antagonist, Δ9-THCV has been reported to activate or block certain TRP cation channels
that are also targeted by Δ9-THC (Table 6.4). There is also evidence that Δ9-THCV can activate
GPR55 with similar potency to but greater efficacy than Δ 9-THC. This has come from experiments with human GPR55-expressing HEK293 cells in which both these phytocannabinoids
were found to stimulate ERK1/2 phosphorylation at concentrations above 1 µM (Anavi-Goffer
et al. 2012). It was also found in the same investigation that when administered at a concentration of 1 µM, Δ9-THCV produced a downward shift in the log concentration–response curve of
­L-α-lysophosphatidylinositol for its apparent activation of GPR55 that was greater in magnitude
than the downward shift produced by 1 µM Δ9-THC.
The extent to which Δ9-THCV interacts with other pharmacological targets remains to be
established. Further research is also needed to identify the mechanisms by which this phytocannabinoid inhibits firstly, electrically-evoked contractions of the mouse isolated vas deferens, at
concentrations of 10 µM or more, in an apparent CB1 receptor-independent manner (Thomas
et al. 2005), and secondly, [35S]GTPγS binding to the membranes of CHO cells expressing dopamine D2, but most probably not cannabinoid CB1 or CB2 receptors (Dennis et al. 2008).

6.7 Caryophyllene activates CB2 receptors
Convincing evidence has been obtained that there is at least one non-phytocannabinoid constituent of cannabis that can activate cannabinoid receptors. This is the sesquiterpene, (E)-BCP
(Fig. 6.1), which appears to have the ability to activate CB2 receptors. Thus, Gertsch et al. (2008)
have found that this compound can:
◆

◆

◆

displace [ 3H]CP55940 from specific binding sites on membranes obtained from hCB 2
receptor-­expressing HEK293 cells with significant potency (Table 6.1)
inhibit forskolin-induced stimulation of cyclic AMP production by hCB2-transfected CHO
cells (EC50 = 1.9 µM)
stimulate calcium release within CB2-expressing human promyelocytic leukemia (HL60) cells
(EC50 = 11.5 µM), but not within HL60 cells devoid of CB2 receptor surface expression, in a
manner that could be blocked by 1 µM SR144528

129

130

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

◆

◆

induce a rapid phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in both human monocytes and CB2-expressing
HL60 cells, at a concentration of 1 µM, and in a manner that could be blocked by 1 µM
SR144528
inhibit LPS-induced-stimulation of expression of the cytokines, TNF-α and IL-1β, in human
whole blood at 500 nM in a manner that could be opposed by the CB2 receptor antagonist,
AM630, at 5 µM.

At this 5 µM concentration, AM630 has also been found to oppose the ability of 10 µM (E)-BCP
to decrease LPS-induced proinflammatory cytokine expression in a rat intestinal epitheliumderived cell line (Bento et al. 2011).
As to in vivo evidence that (E)-BCP can activate CB2 receptors, this has come from experiments
showing that:
◆

◆

◆

oral administration of (E)-BCP at doses of 5 and 10 mg kg−1 could induce an apparent CB2
receptor-mediated anti-inflammatory effect in mice, as indicated by its ability to attenuate
intraplantar carrageenan-induced paw edema (Gertsch et al. 2008)
an intraperitoneal (E)-BCP dose of 10 mg kg−1 could lessen the dysfunction and ameliorate
the histological injury caused by cisplatin in mouse kidneys (Horváth et al. 2012)
an orally administered (E)-BCP dose of 50 mg kg−1 could reduce signs of colitis induced in
mice by dextran sulfate sodium (Bento et al. 2011).

These in vivo effects all appear to have been CB2 receptor-mediated since the first two of them
could be detected in wild-type mice, but not in mice from which the CB2 receptor had been genetically deleted, and since the third effect was no longer produced by (E)-BCP if it was coadministered with a dose of AM630, 10 mg kg−1 i.p. or orally, that by itself did not affect dextran sulfate
sodium-induced signs of colitis. It is noteworthy, however, that the PPARγ antagonist, GW9662,
was also found to oppose the ability of (E)-BCP to inhibit these signs of colitis (Bento et al. 2011),
suggesting that activation of CB2 receptors may trigger PPARγ activation, or even that these
nuclear receptors can be directly targeted by (E)-BCP. There is now a need for further research
aimed at characterizing the pharmacology of (E)-BCP more fully, especially since there is already
evidence that this compound is not only anti-inflammatory, but also possesses anticarcinogenic,
antibiotic, antioxidant, and local anesthetic activity, as well as an ability to increase membrane
permeability (Ghelardini et al. 2001; Legault and Pichette 2007).
Although (E)-BCP displays significant potency at displacing [3H]CP554940 from specific binding sites on hCB2 receptors, it has been found to induce only a slight displacement of this tritiated
ligand from hCB1 receptors in HEK293 cell membranes, even at the rather high concentration of
10 µM (Gertsch et al. 2008). It differs, therefore, from all other constituents of cannabis that are
currently known to activate CB2 receptors (Δ9-THC, Δ8-THC, CBN and Δ9-THCV), since they all
possess significant affinity for CB1 receptors as well (Table 6.1).

6.8 Conclusions and future directions
Constituents of cannabis that have so far been found to activate cannabinoid receptors fall essentially into three pharmacological categories. These are first, the phytocannabinoids, Δ8-THC, Δ9-THC,
and CBN, which activate both CB1 and CB2 receptors, second, the phytocannabinoid, Δ
­ 9-THCV,
which behaves as a CB1 receptor antagonist at doses at which it activates CB2 receptors, and third,
the sesquiterpene, (E)-BCP, which can activate CB2 receptors but lacks significant potency as a CB1
agonist or antagonist. Further research is now required to establish whether any of the many other
constituents of cannabis can activate CB1 and/or CB2 receptors with significant potency.

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

It is important to note that Δ9-THC and Δ9-THCV are both cannabinoid receptor partial agonists, since this is most probably the reason why they activate CB2 receptors in some bioassays but
block these receptors in other bioassays, and indeed, why Δ9-THC can also behave as both an agonist and antagonist at the CB1 receptor. Still to be investigated, however, is first, whether Δ8-THC
or CBN, which are also partial cannabinoid receptor agonists, share the ability of Δ9-THC to both
activate and block cannabinoid receptors, and second, both why Δ9-THCV appears to activate
the CB1 receptor at doses above those at which it blocks this receptor, and why such activation is
detectable in vivo but not in vitro.
At doses at or above those at which it activates CB1 and CB2 receptors, Δ9-THC also interacts
with a number of other pharmacological targets (Table 6.2 and 6.3). Further research is now
required to identify any additional actions of Δ9-THC, and to investigate the impact of the many
cannabinoid receptor-independent actions of this phytocannabinoid on its in vivo pharmacology, for example, by seeking out any toxic or potentially beneficial effects that these other actions
cause. It will also be important to characterize the non-CB1, non-CB2 receptor pharmacology of
Δ8-THC, CBN, Δ9-THCV and (E)-BCP more fully, and to establish the extent to which the complex pharmacological “fingerprint” of Δ9-THC overlaps with the pharmacological fingerprints of
these other constituents of cannabis and indeed, of synthetic and endogenous compounds that are
known to activate CB1 or CB2 receptors.

References
Anavi-Goffer, S., Baillie, G., Irving, A.J., et al. (2012). Modulation of L-α-lysophosphatidylinositol/GPR55
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling by cannabinoids. Journal of Biological Chemistry,
287, 91–104.
Avraham, Y., Ben-Shushan, D., Breuer, A., et al. (2004). Very low doses of Δ8-THC increase food consumption and alter neurotransmitter levels following weight loss. Pharmacology Biochemistry and
Behavior, 77, 675–684.
Banerjee, S.P., Snyder, S.H., and Mechoulam, R. (1975). Cannabinoids: influence on neurotransmitter
uptake in rat brain synaptosomes. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 194, 74–81.
Barann, M., Molderings, G., Brüss, M., Bönisch, H., Urban, B.W., and Göthert, M. (2002). Direct inhibition by cannabinoids of human 5-HT3A receptors: probable involvement of an allosteric modulatory
site. British Journal of Pharmacology, 137, 589–596.
Bátkai, S., Mukhopadhyay, P., Horváth, B., et al. (2012). Δ8-tetrahydrocannabivarin prevents hepatic
ischaemia/reperfusion injury by decreasing oxidative stress and inflammatory responses through cannabinoid CB2 receptors. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165, 2450–2461.
Bayewitch, M., Rhee, M-H., Avidor-Reiss, T., Breuer, A., Mechoulam, R., and Vogel, Z. (1996).
(−)-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol antagonizes the peripheral cannabinoid receptor-mediated inhibition of
adenylyl cyclase. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 271, 9902–9905.
Bento, A.F., Marcon, R., Dutra, R.C., et al. (2011). β-caryophyllene inhibits dextran sulfate sodiuminduced colitis in mice through CB2 receptor activation and PPARγ pathway. American Journal of
Pathology, 178, 1153–1166.
Bolognini, D., Cascio, M.G., Parolaro, D., and Pertwee, R.G. (2012). AM630 behaves as a protean ligand
at the human cannabinoid CB2 receptor. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165, 2561–2574.
Bolognini, D., Costa, B., Maione, S., et al. (2010). The plant cannabinoid Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin can
decrease signs of inflammation and inflammatory pain in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 160,
677–687.
Booker, L., Naidu, P.S., Razdan, R.K., Mahadevan, A., and Lichtman, A.H. (2009). Evaluation of prevalent
phytocannabinoids in the acetic acid model of visceral nociception. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 105,
42–47.

131

132

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Brents, L.K., Gallus-Zawada, A., Radominska-Pandya, A., et al. (2012). Monohydroxylated metabolites
of the K2 synthetic cannabinoid JWH-073 retain intermediate to high cannabinoid 1 receptor (CB1R)
affinity and exhibit neutral antagonist to partial agonist activity. Biochemical Pharmacology, 83,
952–961.
Brents, L.K., Reichard, E.E., Zimmerman, S.M., Moran, J.H., Fantegrossi, W.E., and Prather, P.L. (2011).
Phase I hydroxylated metabolites of the K2 synthetic cannabinoid JWH-018 retain in vitro and in vivo
cannabinoid 1 receptor affinity and activity. PLoS ONE, 6.
Burstein, S., Hunter, S.A., Sedor, C., and Shulman, S. (1982). Prostaglandins and cannabis - IX.
Stimulation of prostaglandin E2 synthesis in human lung fibroblasts by Δ1-tetrahydrocannabinol.
Biochemical Pharmacology, 31, 2361–2365.
Busch-Petersen, J., Hill, W.A., Fan, P., et al. (1996). Unsaturated side chain β-11hydroxyhexahydrocannabinol analogs. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 39, 3790–3796.
Cabral, G.A. and Staab, A. (2005) Effects on the immune system. In: R.G. Pertwee (ed.). Cannabinoids.
Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology. Vol. 168. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 385–423.
Caffarel, M.M., Andradas, C., Mira, E., et al. (2010). Cannabinoids reduce ErbB2-driven breast cancer
progression through Akt inhibition. Molecular Cancer, 9, 196.
Carrier, E.J., Auchampach, J.A., and Hillard, C.J. (2006). Inhibition of an equilibrative nucleoside transporter by cannabidiol: a mechanism of cannabinoid immunosuppression. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103, 7895–7900.
Cox, M.L., Haller, V.L., and Welch, S.P. (2007). The antinociceptive effect of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in
the arthritic rat involves the CB2 cannabinoid receptor. European Journal of Pharmacology, 570, 50–56.
De Petrocellis, L. and Di Marzo, V. (2010). Non-CB1, non-CB2 receptors for endocannabinoids, plant cannabinoids, and synthetic cannabimimetics: focus on G-protein-coupled receptors and transient receptor
potential channels. Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology, 5, 103–121.
De Petrocellis, L., Ligresti, A., Moriello, A.S., et al. (2011). Effects of cannabinoids and cannabinoidenriched Cannabis extracts on TRP channels and endocannabinoid metabolic enzymes. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 163, 1479–1494.
De Petrocellis, L., Orlando, P., Moriello, A.S., et al. (2012). Cannabinoid actions at TRPV channels: effects
on TRPV3 and TRPV4 and their potential relevance to gastrointestinal inflammation. Acta Physiologica,
204, 255–266.
De Petrocellis, L., Vellani, V., Schiano-Moriello, A., et al. (2008). Plant-derived cannabinoids modulate
the activity of transient receptor potential channels of ankyrin type-1 and melastatin type-8. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 325, 1007–1015.
Dennis, I., Whalley, B.J., and Stephens, G.J. (2008). Effects of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin on [35S]GTPγS
binding in mouse brain cerebellum and piriform cortex membranes. British Journal of Pharmacology,
154, 1349–1358.
Di Marzo, V., Breivogel, C.S., Tao, Q., et al. (2000). Levels, metabolism, and pharmacological activity of
anandamide in CB1 cannabinoid receptor knockout mice: evidence for non-CB1, non-CB2 receptormediated actions of anandamide in mouse brain. Journal of Neurochemistry, 75, 2434–2444.
ElSohly, M.A. and Slade, D. (2005). Chemical constituents of marijuana: the complex mixture of natural
cannabinoids. Life Sciences, 78, 539–548.
Evans, F.J. (1991). Cannabinoids: the separation of central from peripheral effects on a structural basis.
Planta Medica, 57, S60–S67.
Farrimond, J.A., Whalley, B.J., and Williams, C.M. (2012). Cannabinol and cannabidiol exert opposing
effects on rat feeding patterns. Psychopharmacology, 223, 117–129.
Felder, C.C., Joyce, K.E., Briley, E.M., et al. (1995). Comparison of the pharmacology and signal transduction of the human cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors. Molecular Pharmacology, 48, 443–450.

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

García, C., Palomo-Garo, C., García-Arencibia, M., Ramos, J.A., Pertwee, R.G., and Fernández-Ruiz, J.
(2011). Symptom-relieving and neuroprotective effects of the phytocannabinoid Δ9-THCV in animal
models of Parkinson’s disease. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1495–1506.
Gérard, C.M., Mollereau, C., Vassart, G., and Parmentier, M. (1991). Molecular cloning of a human cannabinoid receptor which is also expressed in testis. Biochemical Journal, 279, 129–134.
Gertsch, J., Leonti, M., Raduner, S., et al. (2008). Beta-caryophyllene is a dietary cannabinoid. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 9099–9104.
Ghelardini, C., Galeotti, N., Di Cesare Mannelli, L., Mazzanti, G., and Bartolini, A. (2001). Local anaesthetic activity of β-caryophyllene. Il Farmaco, 56, 387–389.
Gill, E.W., Paton, W.D.M., and Pertwee, R.G. (1970). Preliminary experiments on the chemistry and pharmacology of cannabis. Nature, 228, 134–136.
Govaerts, S.J., Hermans, E., and Lambert, D.M. (2004). Comparison of cannabinoid ligands affinities and
efficacies in murine tissues and in transfected cells expressing human recombinant cannabinoid receptors. European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 23, 233–243.
Greenberg, J.H., Mellors, A., and McGowan, J.C. (1978). Molar volume relationships and specific inhibition of a synaptosomal enzyme by psychoactive cannabinoids. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 21,
1208–1212.
Guindon, J. and Hohmann, A.G. (2008). Cannabinoid CB2 receptors: a therapeutic target for the treatment
of inflammatory and neuropathic pain. British Journal of Pharmacology, 153, 319–334.
Hejazi, N., Zhou, C., Oz, M., Sun, H., Ye, J.H., and Zhang, L. (2006). Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol and
endogenous cannabinoid anandamide directly potentiate the function of glycine receptors. Molecular
Pharmacology, 69, 991–997.
Hill, A.J., Weston, S.E., Jones, N.A., et al. (2010). Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin suppresses in vitro epileptiform and in vivo seizure activity in adult rats. Epilepsia, 51, 1522–1532.
Hillard, C.J., Harris, R.A., and Bloom, A.S. (1985). Effects of the cannabinoids on physical properties
of brain membranes and phospholipid vesicles: fluorescence studies. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 232, 579–588.
Horváth, B., Mukhopadhyay, P., Kechrid, M., et al. (2012). β-Caryophyllene ameliorates cisplatin-induced
nephrotoxicity in a cannabinoid 2 receptor-dependent manner. Free Radical Biology and Medicine, 52,
1325–1333.
Howlett, A.C. (2005). Cannabinoid receptor signaling. In: R.G. Pertwee (ed.). Cannabinoids. Handbook of
Experimental Pharmacology. Vol. 168. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 53–79.
Howlett, A.C., Barth, F., Bonner, T.I., et al. (2002). International Union of Pharmacology. XXVII.
Classification of cannabinoid receptors. Pharmacological Reviews, 54, 161–202.
Huffman, J.W., Liddle, J., Yu, S., et al. (1999). 3-(1′,1′-dimethylbutyl)-1-deoxy-Δ8-THC and related
compounds: synthesis of selective ligands for the CB2 receptor. Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry, 7,
2905–2914.
Iwamura, H., Suzuki, H., Ueda, Y., Kaya, T., and Inaba, T. (2001). In vitro and in vivo pharmacological characterization of JTE-907, a novel selective ligand for cannabinoid CB2 receptor. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 296, 420–425.
Kelley, B.G. and Thayer, S.A. (2004). Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol antagonizes endocannabinoid modulation of synaptic transmission between hippocampal neurons in culture. Neuropharmacology, 46,
709–715.
Koch, M., Dehghani, F., Habazettl, I., Schomerus, C., and Korf, H-W. (2006). Cannabinoids attenuate
norepinephrine-induced melatonin biosynthesis in the rat pineal gland by reducing arylalkylamine
N-acetyltransferase activity without involvement of cannabinoid receptors. Journal of Neurochemistry,
98, 267–278.

133

134

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Lauckner, J.E., Jensen, J.B., Chen, H-Y., Lu, H-C., Hille, B., and Mackie, K. (2008). GPR55 is a cannabinoid receptor that increases intracellular calcium and inhibits M current. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 2699–2704.
Legault, J. and Pichette, A. (2007). Potentiating effect of β-caryophyllene on anticancer activity of
α-humulene, isocaryophyllene and paclitaxel. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 59, 1643–1647.
Ma, Y-L., Weston, S.E., Whalley, B.J., and Stephens, G.J. (2008). The phytocannabinoid
­Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin modulates inhibitory neurotransmission in the cerebellum. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 154, 204–215.
MacLennan, S.J., Reynen, P.H., Kwan, J., and Bonhaus, D.W. (1998). Evidence for inverse agonism of SR141716A at human recombinant cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 124, 619–622.
Marsicano, G., Moosmann, B., Hermann, H., Lutz, B., and Behl, C. (2002). Neuroprotective properties of
cannabinoids against oxidative stress: role of the cannabinoid receptor CB1. Journal of Neurochemistry,
80, 448–456.
Martin, B.R., Compton, D.R., Semus, S.F., et al. (1993). Pharmacological evaluation of iodo and nitro analogs of Δ8-THC and Δ9-THC. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 46, 295–301.
Martin, B.R., Compton, D.R., Thomas, B.F., et al. (1991). Behavioral, biochemical, and molecular modeling evaluations of cannabinoid analogs. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 40, 471–478.
Matsuda, L.A., Lolait, S.J., Brownstein, M.J., Young, A.C., and Bonner, T.I. (1990). Structure of a cannabinoid receptor and functional expression of the cloned cDNA. Nature, 346, 561–564.
McHugh, D., Page, J., Dunn, E., and Bradshaw, H.B. (2012). Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol and N-arachidonyl
glycine are full agonists at GPR18 receptors and induce migration in human endometrial HEC-1B cells.
British Journal of Pharmacology, 165, 2414–2424.
Mechoulam, R. (1973). Cannabinoid chemistry. In: R. Mechoulam (ed.). Marijuana. New York: Academic
Press, pp. 1–99.
Monory, K., Tzavara, E.T., Lexime, J., et al. (2002). Novel, not adenylyl cyclase-coupled cannabinoid binding site in cerebellum of mice. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 292, 231–235.
O’Sullivan, S.E., Tarling, E.J., Bennett, A.J., Kendall, D.A., and Randall, M.D. (2005). Novel time-­
dependent vascular actions of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol mediated by peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 337, 824–831.
Oz, M. (2006). Receptor-independent actions of cannabinoids on cell membranes: focus on endocannabinoids. Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 111, 114–144.
Paronis, C.A., Nikas, S.P., Shukla, V.G., and Makriyannis, A. (2012). Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol acts as a
partial agonist/antagonist in mice. Behavioural Pharmacology, 23, 802–805.
Patel, S. and Hillard, C.J. (2006). Pharmacological evaluation of cannabinoid receptor ligands in a mouse
model of anxiety: further evidence for an anxiolytic role for endogenous cannabinoid signaling. Journal
of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 318, 304–311.
Pertwee, R.G. (1972). The ring test: a quantitative method for assessing the ‘cataleptic’ effect of cannabis in
mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 46, 753–763.
Pertwee, R.G. (1988). The central neuropharmacology of psychotropic cannabinoids. Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, 36, 189–261.
Pertwee, R.G. (1997). Pharmacology of cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors. Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, 74, 129–180.
Pertwee, R.G. (1999). Pharmacology of cannabinoid receptor ligands. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 6,
635–664.
Pertwee, R.G. (2005). Pharmacological actions of cannabinoids. In: R.G. Pertwee (ed.). Cannabinoids.
Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology. Vol. 168. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 1–51.

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL

Pertwee, R.G. (2010). Receptors and channels targeted by synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists and
antagonists. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 17, 1360–1381.
Pertwee, R.G., Griffin, G., Lainton, J.A.H., and Huffman, J.W. (1995). Pharmacological characterization
of three novel cannabinoid receptor agonists in the mouse isolated vas deferens. European Journal of
Pharmacology, 284, 241–247.
Pertwee, R.G., Howlett, A.C., Abood, M.E., et al. (2010). International Union of Basic and Clinical
Pharmacology. LXXIX. Cannabinoid receptors and their ligands: beyond CB1 and CB2. Pharmacological
Reviews, 62, 588–631.
Pertwee, R.G. and Thomas, A. (2009). Therapeutic applications for agents that act at CB1 and CB2 receptors. In: P. Reggio (ed.). The Cannabinoid Receptors. New York: Humana Press, pp. 361–392.
Pertwee, R.G., Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A., et al. (2007). The psychoactive plant cannabinoid,
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, is antagonized by Δ8- and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin in mice in vivo. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 586–594.
Poddar, M.K. and Dewey, W.L. (1980). Effects of cannabinoids on catecholamine uptake and release in
hypothalamic and striatal synaptosomes. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 214,
63–67.
Rakhshan, F., Day, T.A., Blakely, R.D., and Barker, E.L. (2000). Carrier-mediated uptake of the endogenous cannabinoid anandamide in RBL-2H3 cells. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, 292, 960–967.
Rhee, M-H., Vogel, Z., Barg, J., et al. (1997). Cannabinol derivatives: binding to cannabinoid receptors and
inhibition of adenylylcyclase. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 40, 3228–3233.
Riedel, G., Fadda, P., McKillop-Smith, S., Pertwee, R.G., Platt, B., and Robinson, L. (2009). Synthetic and
plant-derived cannabinoid receptor antagonists show hypophagic properties in fasted and non-fasted
mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 156, 1154–1166.
Rinaldi-Carmona, M., Barth, F., Héaulme, M., et al. (1994). SR141716A, a potent and selective antagonist
of the brain cannabinoid receptor. FEBS Letters, 350, 240–244.
Ryberg, E., Larsson, N., Sjögren, S., et al. (2007). The orphan receptor GPR55 is a novel cannabinoid
receptor. British Journal of Pharmacology, 152, 1092–1101.
Scutt, A. and Williamson, E.M. (2007). Cannabinoids stimulate fibroblastic colony formation by bone marrow cells indirectly via CB2 receptors. Calcified Tissue International, 80, 50–59.
Seely, K.A., Lapoint, J., Moran, J.H., and Fattore, L. (2012). Spice drugs are more than harmless herbal
blends: a review of the pharmacology and toxicology of synthetic cannabinoids. Progress in NeuroPsychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 39, 234–243.
Shen, M. and Thayer, S.A. (1999). Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol acts as a partial agonist to modulate glutamatergic synaptic transmission between rat hippocampal neurons in culture. Molecular Pharmacology,
55, 8–13.
Showalter, V.M., Compton, D.R., Martin, B.R., and Abood, M.E. (1996). Evaluation of binding in a
transfected cell line expressing a peripheral cannabinoid receptor (CB2): identification of cannabinoid receptor subtype selective ligands. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 278,
989–999.
Sim, L.J., Hampson, R.E., Deadwyler, S.A., and Childers, S.R. (1996). Effects of chronic treatment with
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol on cannabinoid-stimulated [35S]GTPγS autoradiography in rat brain. Journal
of Neuroscience, 16, 8057–8066.
Slipetz, D.M., O’Neill, G.P., Favreau, L., et al. (1995). Activation of the human peripheral cannabinoid
receptor results in inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. Molecular Pharmacology, 48, 352–361.
Straiker, A. and Mackie, K. (2005). Depolarization-induced suppression of excitation in murine autaptic
hippocampal neurones. Journal of Physiology, 569, 501–517.

135

136

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A., Wease, K.N., et al. (2005). Evidence that the plant cannabinoid
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin is a cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptor antagonist. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 146, 917–926.
Varvel, S.A., Bridgen, D.T., Tao, Q., Thomas, B.F., Martin, B.R., and Lichtman, A.H. (2005).
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol accounts for the antinociceptive, hypothermic, and cataleptic effects of marijuana in mice. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 314, 329–337.
Welch, S.P., Huffman, J.W., and Lowe, J. (1998). Differential blockade of the antinociceptive effects
of centrally administered cannabinoids by SR141716A. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, 286, 1301–1308.
Wiley, J.L., Jefferson, R.G., Grier, M.C., Mahadevan, A., Razdan, R.K., and Martin, B.R. (2001). Novel
pyrazole cannabinoids: insights into CB1 receptor recognition and activation. Journal of Pharmacology
and Experimental Therapeutics, 296, 1013–1022.
Wilkinson, J.D. and Williamson, E.M. (2007). Cannabinoids inhibit human keratinocyte proliferation
through a non-CB1/CB2 mechanism and have a potential therapeutic value in the treatment of psoriasis.
Journal of Dermatological Science, 45, 87–92.
Wise, L.E., Cannavacciulo, R., Cravatt, B.F., Martin, B.F., and Lichtman, A.H. (2008). Evaluation of fatty
acid amides in the carrageenan-induced paw edema model. Neuropharmacology, 54, 181–188.
Yamamoto, I., Watanabe, K., Matsunaga, T., Kimura, T., Funahashi, T., and Yoshimura, H. (2003).
Pharmacology and toxicology of major constituents of marijuana - on the metabolic activation of cannabinoids and its mechanism. Journal of Toxicology - Toxin Reviews, 22, 577–589.
Yamaori, S., Ebisawa, J., Okushima, Y., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2011a). Potent inhibition of
human cytochrome P450 3A isoforms by cannabidiol: role of phenolic hydroxyl groups in the resorcinol
moiety. Life Sciences, 88, 730–736.
Yamaori, S., Koeda, K., Kushihara, M., Hada, Y., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2012). Comparison
in the in vitro inhibitory effects of major phytocannabinoids and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons contained in marijuana smoke on cytochrome P450 2C9 activity. Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics,
27, 294–300.
Yamaori, S., Kushihara, M., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2010). Characterization of major phytocannabinoids, cannabidiol and cannabinol, as isoform-selective and potent inhibitors of human CYP1
enzymes. Biochemical Pharmacology, 79, 1691–1698.
Yamaori, S., Maeda, C., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2011b). Differential inhibition of human cytochrome P450 2A6 and 2B6 by major phytocannabinoids. Forensic Toxicology, 29, 117–124.
Yamaori, S., Okamoto, Y., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2011c). Cannabidiol, a major phytocannabinoid, as a potent atypical inhibitor for CYP2D6. Drug Metabolism and Disposition, 39, 2049–2056.
Yin, H., Chu, A., Li, W., et al. (2009). Lipid G protein-coupled receptor ligand identification using
β-arrestin PathHunterTM assay. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 284, 12328–12338.
Zimmer, A., Zimmer, A.M., Hohmann, A.G., Herkenham, M., and Bonner, T.I. (1999). Increased mortality, hypoactivity, and hypoalgesia in cannabinoid CB1 receptor knockout mice. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 96, 5780–5785.
Zygmunt, P.M., Andersson, D.A., and Högestätt, E.D. (2002). Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabinol
activate capsaicin-sensitive sensory nerves via a CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptor-independent mechanism. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 4720–4727.

Chapter 7

Known Pharmacological Actions of Nine
Nonpsychotropic Phytocannabinoids
Maria Grazia Cascio and Roger G. Pertwee

7.1 Introduction
The plant Cannabis sativa contains more than 100 chemical compounds, known collectively
as phytocannabinoids. Four of these compounds, Δ9- and Δ8-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9- and
Δ8-THC), Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin (Δ9-THCV), and cannabinol (CBN), can activate cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1) and/or type 2 (CB2) receptors, both in vitro at submicromolar
concentrations and in vivo, and we have recently presented current information about their
pharmacological actions elsewhere (Pertwee and Cascio, Chapter 6, this volume). No other
phytocannabinoid investigated to date has been reported to activate CB1 or CB2 receptors with
significant potency. These other phytocannabinoids are cannabichromene (CBC), cannabidiol
(CBD), cannabidivarin (CBDV), cannabidiolic acid (CBDA), cannabigerol (CBG), cannabigerovarin (CBGV), cannabigerolic acid (CBGA), Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA), and
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid (THCVA). In this chapter we provide an overview of what is
currently known about the pharmacological actions of each of these nine phytocannabinoids.

7.2 Cannabichromene (CBC)
CBC (Fig. 7.1) is, together with THC, CBD, and CBN, one of the most abundant naturally occurring cannabinoids (Brown and Harvey 1990). Even so, relatively few studies have yet been directed at identifying the pharmacological actions of this phytocannabinoid. What has been found
so far is that CBC shows significant potency at targeting certain transient receptor potential
(TRP) cation channels. Thus, for example, De Petrocellis et al. (2011, 2012) have reported that
at concentrations below 10 µM, CBC can activate TRP ankyrin-type 1 (TRPA1) cation channels
(EC50 = 90 nM), desensitize these channels to activation by allyl isothiocyanate (IC50 = 370 nM),
activate TRPV4 and TRPV3 cation channels (EC50 = 600 nM and 1.9 µM, respectively), and
desensitize TRPV2 and TRPV4 channels to their activation by an agonist (IC50 = 6.5 and 9.9 µM,
respectively) (Table 7.1). It was also found in one or other of these investigations (Table 7.1)
that CBC can, albeit with somewhat lower potency, activate TRPV1 channels (EC50 = 24.2 µM),
desensitize TRPV3 channels to their activation by an agonist (IC50 = 200.8 µM), and block the
activation of TRPM8 cation channels (IC50 = 40.7 µM). In addition, it has been reported that
CBC displays an ability to inhibit both the cellular uptake of one endocannabinoid, anandamide
(IC50 = 12.3 µM) and the metabolism by monoacylglycerol lipase of another endocannabinoid,
2-arachidonoyl glycerol (IC50 = 50.1 µM) (De Petrocellis et al. 2011; Tables 7.1–7.3). CBC has
also been found to: (1) induce antinociception by itself and to potentiate the antinociceptive
effect of THC in the mouse tail-flick assay (Davis and Hatoum 1983), and (2) stimulate the

138

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

O

CBC
OH
HO

HO

HO

HO

CBD

HO

HO

CBDV

OH

COOH

CBDA

OH

HO

CBG

HO

CBGV

OH

OH
COOH

HO

HO

CBGA-A

COOH

OH

CBGA-B

OH
COOH

O

Δ9-THCA-A

O
COOH

OH

Δ9-THCA-B

OH
COOH

O

Δ9-THCVA-A

O
COOH

Δ9-THCVA-B

Fig. 7.1 The chemical structures of cannabichromene (CBC), cannabidiol (CBD), cannabidivarin
(CBDV), cannabidiolic acid (CBDA), cannabigerol (CBG), cannabigerovarin (CBGV), cannabigerolic
acid A (CBGA-A), cannabigerolic acid B (CBGA-B), Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid A (THCA-A),
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid B (Δ9-THCA-B), Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid A (Δ9-THCVA-A),
and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid B (Δ9-THCVA-B).

descending pathway of antinociception in rat ventrolateral periaqueductal gray (Maione et al.
2011). It was also found by Maione et al. (2011) that intracerebrally injected CBC reduced tail
flick-related nociception in anesthetized rats in a manner that could be blocked by intracerebral
administration of the CB1-selective antagonist, AM251, the adenosine A1-selective antagonist,
DPCPX, and the TRPA1-selective antagonist, AP18, although not by the TRPV1-selective antagonist, ­5′-iodo-resiniferatoxin. The extent to which CBC induces antinociception by activating/­
desensitizing TRP channels, by somehow increasing the activation of adenosine A 1 receptors

KNOWN PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF NINE NONPSYCHOTROPIC PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Table 7.1 A selection of receptors and ion channels that CBC, CBD, CBDV, or CBDA has been
reported to target in vitro
Compound and its
concentration§

Pharmacological target and effect

Reference

Receptors and channels
CBC

CBD

< 1 µM

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2008, 2011

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

1–10 µM

TRPV3 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

>10 µM

TRPV1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

CB1 receptor (B)

Thomas et al. 2007

CB2 receptor (B)

Thomas et al. 2007

GPR55 (B)

Pertwee et al. 2010†

5-HT1A receptor (P)

Rock et al. 2012

5-HT3A ligand-gated ion channel (B)‡

Yang et al. 2010

TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis et al. 2008, 2011

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2008, 2011

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

CB1 receptor (D)

Pertwee 2008†

CB2 receptor (D)

Pertwee et al. 2010†

PPARγ nuclear receptor (A)

Pertwee et al. 2010†

CaV3 T-type Ca2+ voltage gated ion

Ross et al. 2008

TRPV1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV2 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV3 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

α3 glycine ligand-gated ion channel (P)

Xiong et al. 2012

GPR18 (A or B)

McHugh et al. 2012

5-HT1A receptor (A)

Pertwee 2008†; Russo et al. 2005

µ and δ opioid receptors (B)‡

Pertwee 2008†

α1 and α1β glycine ligand-gated ion
channels (P)‡

Ahrens et al. 2009

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

TRPV1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV2 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV3 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

< 1 µM

1–10 µM

channels (−)

>10 µM

CBDV

< 1 µM

1–10 µM

139

140

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Table 7.1 (continued) A selection of receptors and ion channels that CBC, CBD, CBDV, or CBDA
has been reported to target in vitro
Compound and its
concentration§

Pharmacological target and effect

Reference

CBDA

< 1 µM

5-HT1A receptor (P)

Bolognini et al. 2013

1–10 µM

GPR55 (B)

Anavi-Goffer et al. 2012

TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis et al. 2008, 2011

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2008

TRPV1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011; Ligresti
et al. 2006

>10 µM

Abbreviations: 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; A, activation; B, blockade; CBC, cannabichromene; CBD, cannabidiol; CBDV,
cannabidivarin; CBDA, cannabidiolic acid; D, displacement of [3H]CP55940 or [3H]HU243 from specific binding sites;
P, potentiation; PPAR, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor; TRP, transient receptor potential; (−), inhibition or
antagonism. † review article; § EC50 or IC50 when this has been determined; ‡ apparent allosteric modulation.

Table 7.2 A selection of enzymes that CBC, CBD, CBDV, CBDA, CBG, CBGA, or THCA has been
reported to target in vitro
Compound and its
concentration§

Pharmacological target and effect

Reference

Enzymes
CBC

>10 µM

Monoacylglycerol lipase (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011; Ligresti
et al. 2006

CBD

< 1 µM

CYP1A1(−)

Yamaori et al. 2010

1–10 µM

CYP1A2 and CYP1B1 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2010

CYP2B6 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011b

CYP2C9 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2012

CYP2D6 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011c

CYP3A5 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011a

Mg2+-ATPase (−)

Pertwee 2008†

Arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (−)

Koch et al. 2006

Indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (−)

Jenny et al. 2009

15-lipoxygenase (−)

Takeda et al. 2009

Phospholipase A2 (+)

Pertwee 2008†

Glutathione peroxidase (+)

Massi et al. 2006; Usami et al.
2008

Glutathione reductase (+)

Massi et al. 2006; Usami et al.
2008

KNOWN PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF NINE NONPSYCHOTROPIC PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Table 7.2 (continued) A selection of enzymes that CBC, CBD, CBDV, CBDA, CBG, CBGA, or THCA
has been reported to target in vitro
Compound and its
concentration§

Pharmacological target and effect

Reference

CYP2A6 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011b

CYP3A4 and CYP3A7 (−)

Yamaori et al. 2011a

Fatty acid amide hydrolase (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

Cyclooxygenase (−)

Evans 1991

5-lipoxygenase (−)

Takeda et al. 2009

Superoxide dismutase (−)

Usami et al. 2008

Catalase (−)

Usami et al. 2008

NAD(P)H-quinone reductase (−)

Usami et al. 2008

Progesterone 17α-hydroxylase (−)

Funahashi et al. 2005; Watanabe
et al. 2005

Testosterone 6β-hydroxylase (−)

Watanabe et al. 2005

Testosterone 16α -hydroxylase (−)

Watanabe et al. 2005

Phosphatases (induction)

Sreevalsan et al. 2011

Diacylglycerol lipase α (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

NAAA (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

1–10 µM

Cyclooxygenase-2 (−)

Takeda et al. 2008

>10 µM

NAAA (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

Diacylglycerol lipase α (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

Cyclooxygenase-1 (−)

Ruhaak et al. 2011; Takeda et al.
2008

1–10 µM

Lipoxygenase (−)

Evans 1991

>10 µM

Monoacylglycerol lipase (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

Phospholipase A2 (+)

Evans 1991

Cyclooxygenase-2 (−)

Ruhaak et al. 2011

Diacylglycerol lipase α (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

Cyclooxygenase-1 (−)

Ruhaak et al. 2011

Cyclooxygenase-2 (−)

Ruhaak et al. 2011

Monoacylglycerol lipase (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

Diacylglycerol lipase α (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

Cyclooxygenase-1 (−)

Ruhaak et al. 2011

Cyclooxygenase-2 (−)

Ruhaak et al. 2011

>10 µM

CBDV

CBDA

CBG

CBGA

THCA

>10 µM

>10 µM

>10 µM

Abbreviations: CBC, cannabichromene; CBD, cannabidiol; CBDV, cannabidivarin;, CBDA, cannabidiolic acid; CBG,
­cannabigerol; CBGA cannabigerolic acid; NAAA, N-acylethanolamine-hydrolyzing acid amidase; THCA,
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid. (+) activation; (−) inhibition; † review article. § EC50 or IC50 when this has been
­determined.

141

142

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Table 7.3 A selection of cellular uptake or other processes that CBC, CBD, CBDV, CBDA, CBG,
CBGA, or THCA has been reported to target in vitro
Compound and its
concentration§

Pharmacological target and effect

Reference

Transporters and cellular uptake
CBC

>10 µM

Cellular uptake of anandamide (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011; Ligresti
et al. 2006

CBD

< 1 µM

Adenosine uptake by cultured microglia
and macrophages (−)

Pertwee 2008†

Synaptosomal uptake of calcium (−)

Pertwee 2008†

Synaptosomal uptake of dopamine (−)

Pertwee 2008†

Synaptosomal uptake of
norepinephrine(−)

Pertwee 2008†

Synaptosomal uptake of
5-hydroxytryptamine (−)

Pertwee 2008†

Synaptosomal uptake of γ-aminobutyric
acid (−)

Pertwee 2008†

Cellular uptake of anandamide (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011; Ligresti
et al. 2006; Rakhshan et al. 2000

P-glycoprotein (drug efflux transporter) (−)

Zhu et al. 2006

>10 µM

Choline uptake by rat hippocampal
homogenates (−)

Pertwee 2008†

CBDV

>10 µM

Cellular uptake of anandamide (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

CBG

>10 µM

Cellular uptake of anandamide (−)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011; Ligresti
et al. 2006

Synaptosomal uptake of
norepinephrine (−)

Banerjee et al. 1975

Synaptosomal uptake of
5-hydroxytryptamine (−)

Banerjee et al. 1975

Synaptosomal uptake of γ-aminobutyric
acid (−)

Banerjee et al. 1975

1–10 µM

Other actions or effects
CBD

< 1 µM

Membrane fluidity (↑)

Pertwee 2004a†

1–10 µM

Signs of neuroprotection

Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2012;
Pertwee 2004a

Oxidative stress (↓)

Pertwee 2004a†

Release of certain cytokines (↑ or ↓)

Pertwee 2004a†

Membrane stability (↑)

Pertwee 2004a†

Release of certain cytokines (↑ or ↓)

Pertwee 2004a†

>10 µM

Abbreviations: CBC, cannabichromene; CBD, cannabidiol; CBDV, cannabidivarin; CBG, cannabigerol. (−), inhibition; ↑,
increase; ↓, decrease; † review article; § EC50 or IC50 when this has been determined.

KNOWN PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF NINE NONPSYCHOTROPIC PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

and by activating CB1 receptors indirectly, by elevating extracellular levels of endocannabinoids
through inhibition of their cellular uptake or metabolism, remains to be established.

7.3 Cannabidiol (CBD)
CBD (Fig. 7.1; Tables 7.1–7.3), was first isolated from the cannabis plant in the late 1930s and early
1940s, and its structure was elucidated in 1963 by Mechoulam and Shvo (Mechoulam and Hanus
2002). Unlike the main psychotropic component of cannabis, Δ9-THC, CBD lacks psychotropic
activity but does have therapeutic potential, both for the management of disorders such as inflammation, anxiety, emesis, and nausea, and as a neuroprotective agent and antioxidant (Pertwee
2004a, 2004b). Indeed, together with Δ9-THC, CBD is a major constituent of Sativex®, a medicine
developed by GW Pharmaceuticals that is used to ameliorate cancer pain and for the relief of
neuropathic pain and spasticity due to multiple sclerosis.
7.3.1 CBD interacts with cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors

The ability of CBD to target cannabinoid receptors has been explored in several investigations,
and a brief summary of some of the assays used in that research can be found elsewhere (Pertwee
and Cascio, Chapter 6, this volume). It has been found in some of these investigations that CBD
displaces [3H]CP55940 from cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors at concentrations in the micromolar range (Table 7.1). In addition, in some functional in vitro assays, CBD has been found
to behave as a low-potency CB1 receptor inverse agonist as indicated by its ability at 10 µM to
inhibit [35S]GTPγS binding to membranes obtained either from C57BL/6 mouse brains or human
­CB1-Chinese hamster ovary (hCB1-CHO) cells (Thomas et al. 2007), or from rat cerebellum
(Petitet et al. 1998). This inverse effect may or may not have been CB1 receptor-mediated since,
although CBD was found to inhibit [35S]GTPγS binding to brain membranes obtained from mice
from which the CB1 receptor had been genetically deleted (CB1−/− mice), it did not inhibit such
binding to membranes obtained from untransfected CHO cells (Thomas et al. 2007).
Interestingly, CBD displays significant potency as an antagonist of cannabinoid receptor agonists such as CP55940 and R-(+)-WIN55212. Thus, there have been reports that CBD antagonizes:
◆

◆

◆

CP55940-induced stimulation of [35S]GTPγS binding to rat cerebellar membranes at 10 µM
(Petitet et al. 1998)
CP55940 and R-(+)-WIN55212 in the mouse isolated vas deferens with apparent KB values in
the low nanomolar range (Pertwee et al. 2002)
CP55940- and R-(+)-WIN55212-induced stimulation of [35S]GTPγS binding to mouse brain
membranes with apparent KB values (79 and 138 nM, respectively) well below the Ki value of
CBD (4.9 µM) for its displacement of [3H]CP55940 from specific binding sites on these membranes (Thomas et al. 2007).

These in vitro findings are consistent with previous reports that CBD can block various in vivo
responses to Δ9-THC in rabbits, rats, mice, and human subjects (Pertwee 2004a, 2004b).
It has also been found that CBD can oppose CP55940-induced stimulation of [35S]GTPγS binding to hCB2-Chinese hamster ovary (hCB2-CHO) cell membranes (Thomas et al. 2007). Its apparent KB value for this antagonism was 65 nM, which is far less than its Ki value for the displacement
of [3H]CP55940 from such membranes (4.2 µM). CBD was also found in this investigation to
inhibit [35S]GTPγS binding to hCB2-CHO cell membranes, an indication that it is a CB2 receptor inverse agonist. Since there is convincing evidence that CB2 receptor inverse agonists reduce

143

144

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

immune cell migration and have anti-inflammatory effects (Lunn et al. 2006), the ability of CBD
to behave as a CB2 receptor inverse agonist could account, at least in part, for its well-documented
anti-inflammatory properties (Izzo et al. 2009; Pertwee 2004a, 2004b), and for its capacity to
inhibit immune cell migration as demonstrated, for example, in Boyden chamber experiments
performed with murine microglial cells or macrophages (Sacerdote et al. 2005; Walter et al. 2003),
or with human neutrophils (McHugh and Ross 2005).
CBD is not generally regarded as being a cannabinoid receptor agonist. It is noteworthy, therefore, that there has been one report that submicromolar concentrations of this phytocannabinoid
can produce a small but significant stimulation of [35S]GTPγS binding to membranes obtained
from CHO cells in which the hCB1 receptor is highly expressed, but not to membranes obtained
from CHO cells that do not express this receptor (Thomas et al. 2007). It may be, therefore, that
CBD is a very low-efficacy CB1 receptor partial agonist that can induce signs of CB1 receptor agonism in tissues in which these receptors are highly expressed. Whether CBD can also behave in
this way in vivo remains to be established. It is noteworthy, however, that there is already evidence
that microsomal enzymes catalyze the metabolism of CBD to Δ9-THC-like compounds such as
6β-hydroxymethyl-Δ9-THC, which may well be psychotropic since it has been found to produce
catalepsy, antinociception, and hypothermia in mice, albeit with less potency than Δ9-THC
(Nagai et al. 1993; Yamamoto et al. 2003). There have also been reports first, that CBD can reduce
signs of compulsive behavior in mice and tail flick-related nociception in anesthetized rats in a
manner that can be antagonized by the CB1-selective antagonist AM251, and second, that CBD
can elevate brain levels of the endogenous CB1 receptor agonist, 2-arachidonoyl glycerol, in rats
(Casarotto et al. 2010; Maione et al. 2011).
7.3.2 CB1 and CB2 receptor-independent actions of CBD

CBD has the ability to produce a large number of cannabinoid receptor-independent effects in
vitro (Tables 7.1–7.3). Among these are several that it can produce at concentrations in the submicromolar range (see Tables 7.1–7.3 for references): (1) antagonism of the G protein-coupled
receptor, GPR55, and of the TRP cation channel, TRPM8 (IC50 = 60 or 80 nM); (2) activation of
TRPA1 (EC50 = 96 or 110 nM) and TRPV4 cation channels (EC50 = 800 nM), and desensitization
of the TRPA1 cation channel to activation by allyl isothiocyanate (IC 50 = 80, 140, or 160 nM);
(3) desensitization of TRPV1 and TRPV3 cation channels to activation by an agonist (IC50 = 600
and 900 nM, respectively); (4) potentiation of the activation of the G protein-coupled 5-HT1A
receptor and of the ligand-gated ion channel, 5-HT3A; (5) inhibition of the human cytochrome
P450 enzyme, CYP1A1; (6) inhibition of the cellular uptake of adenosine and of the synaptosomal uptake of calcium. Importantly, as indicated in sections 7.3.2.1–7.3.2.4, there is evidence that
several of the in vitro effects of CBD listed earlier or in Tables 7.1, 7.2, or 7.3 can also be produced
by this phytocannabinoid in vivo. There is also evidence that when administered repeatedly to
mice or rats, CBD can induce hepatic CYP3A, CYP2B10, and CYP2C enzymes (Pertwee 2004a).
7.3.2.1 Evidence that CBD can increase 5-HT1A receptor activation in vitro

In vitro evidence that CBD can potentiate the activation of 5-HT1A receptors came from the finding that it can enhance stimulation of [35S]GTPγS binding to rat brainstem membranes induced by
the 5-HT1A receptor agonist, 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino)tetralin (8-OH-DPAT) (Rock et al.
2012). This enhancement was found to be produced by CBD at a concentration of 100 nM, but not
at concentrations of 1, 10, 31.62, or 1000 nM, indicating its concentration–response curve to be
bell-shaped. This is a noteworthy finding since the dose–response curves of CBD for its production
in vivo of several effects that seem to be 5-HT1A receptor-mediated have been found to be biphasic

KNOWN PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF NINE NONPSYCHOTROPIC PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

or bell-shaped (section 7.3.2.2). It is also noteworthy that CBD did not displace [3H]8-OH-DPAT
from specific binding sites on rat brainstem membranes at 100 nM, or indeed, at other concentrations between 0.1 nM and 10 µM, suggesting that it did not enhance the activation of 5-HT1A
receptors by interacting directly with sites on these receptors that are targeted by 8-OH-DPAT.
Whether CBD produces this enhancement by interacting allosterically with the 5-HT1A receptor
or by acting on a different target which then somehow augments 5-HT- or 8-OH-DPAT-induced
5-HT1A receptor activation through an indirect mechanism remains to be established.
7.3.2.2 Evidence that CBD can increase 5-HT1A receptor activation in vivo
7.3.2.2.1 CBD induces an apparent 5-HT 1A receptor-mediated attenuation of nausea and

vomiting CBD (5 mg kg−1 i.p.) has been found to attenuate cisplatin-induced (Kwiatkowska
et al. 2004) and lithium chloride-induced (Parker et al. 2004) vomiting and anticipatory retching (Parker et al. 2006) in shrews (Suncus murinus), as well as conditioned gaping (nausea-like
behavior) induced by lithium chloride in rats (Rock et al. 2012). These effects of CBD all appear
to be mediated by 5-HT1A receptors. Thus, WAY100135, a well-established 5-HT1A antagonist,
and/or WAY100635, a more selective 5-HT1A antagonist, have been found to oppose the ability
of CBD to reduce nicotine, cisplatin, and lithium chloride-induced vomiting in shrews, and to
interfere with the establishment of lithium chloride-induced conditioned gaping in rats (Rock et
al. 2011b). Moreover, when injected directly into the rat dorsal raphe nucleus: (1) WAY100635
reversed the antinausea-like effects of systemic CBD, and (2) CBD suppressed nausea-like behavior in a manner that could be opposed by systemic WAY100635 (Rock et al. 2012). It has also
been found that CBD and the 5-HT1A receptor agonist, 8-OH-DPAT, interact synergistically to
suppress nausea-like behavior in rats (Rock et al. 2012). It is noteworthy too that CBD was found
to affect toxin-induced vomiting in shrews in a biphasic manner, potentiating this vomiting at
doses above those at which it had a suppressant effect (Kwiatkowska et al. 2004; Parker et al. 2004).
These in vivo findings are all in line with the in vitro evidence that CBD can potentiate the activation of 5-HT1A receptors, and that its concentration–response curve for the production of this
potentiation is bell-shaped ­(section 7.3.2.1). When considered together, these in vivo and in vitro
findings strongly support the hypothesis that CBD suppresses vomiting in shrews and nausea-like
behavior in rats by somehow augmenting the activation of 5-HT1A receptors in the brainstem by
endogenously released 5-HT (Rock et al. 2012).
7.3.2.2.2 CBD induces an apparent 5-HT1A receptor-mediated attenuation of cerebral infarc-

tion CBD has been found to produce a significant reduction in infarct volume in a mouse middle
cerebral artery occlusion model of cerebral infarction with a bell-shaped dose–response curve
(Mishima et al. 2005). This neuroprotective effect of CBD was opposed by WAY100135, but not
by the CB1 receptor antagonist, rimonabant, or the TRPV1 antagonist, capsazepine. CBD (3 mg
kg−1 i.p.) also increased cerebral blood flow to the cortex, and this effect too was opposed by
WAY100135. These findings suggest that these effects of CBD on cerebral blood flow and infarct
volume were both 5-HT1A receptor-mediated.
7.3.2.2.3 CBD induces apparent 5-HT1A receptor-mediated anxiolytic effects When injected

directly into the dorsolateral periaqueductal gray of rats, CBD has been found to produce signs
of anxiolysis in both the elevated plus maze and the Vogel conflict test (Campos and Guimarães
2008). These effects were opposed by WAY100635, but not by AM251, supporting the hypothesis
that CBD produced these apparent anxiolytic effects by targeting 5-HT1A receptors in the dorsolateral periaqueductal gray. The elevated plus maze experiments were performed with several
doses of CBD and the shape of the resultant dose–response curve was bell-shaped. More recently,

145

146

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

it has also been found that when CBD is injected directly into the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis of rats, it reduces both signs of anxiety in these two bioassays, and the expression of contextual fear conditioning, in a manner that can be prevented by WAY100635 (Gomes et al. 2011,
2012). Intraperitoneally administered CBD has also been found to produce signs of anxiolysis in
rats, and this effect was also blocked by WAY100635 (Resstel et al. 2009). In addition, there have
been reports that CBD can block panic-like responses in rats when administered intracerebrally,
that its repeated intraperitoneal administration can reduce signs of anxiety in rats in a predator
exposure model of posttraumatic stress disorder, and that WAY100635 antagonizes the production by CBD of both these effects (Campos et al. 2012; de Paula Soares et al. 2010).
7.3.2.2.4 Other apparent 5-HT1A receptor-mediated effects produced by CBD In experiments

performed with mice, CBD has been found to share the ability of the well-­established antidepressant, imipramine, to reduce immobility time in the forced swim test, without affecting exploratory behavior in an open field arena (Zanelati et al. 2010). This effect of CBD was blocked by
WAY100635, suggesting that it was 5-HT1A receptor-mediated. It was produced by CBD at a dose
of 30 mg kg−1 but not by lower or higher intraperitoneal doses of this phytocannabinoid. It has
also been found that repeated administration of CBD (i.p.) can induce apparent improvements in
mouse locomotion and cognition following their impairment by bile duct ligation, and that these
improvements can be prevented by WAY100635 (Magen et al. 2010). Finally, WAY100635 has
been reported to oppose the ability of CBD to reduce tail flick-related nociception in anesthetized
rats when both these compounds were injected directly into the ventrolateral periaqueductal gray
(Maione et al. 2011). The dose–response curve of CBD for its production of this antinociceptive
effect was bell-shaped.
7.3.2.3 Evidence that CBD can inhibit adenosine uptake both in vitro

and in vivo

Release of adenosine is evoked during cellular stress and inflammation and constitutes an endogenous mechanism of immunosuppression, an effect of adenosine that is terminated by its cellular uptake and can therefore be enhanced by inhibitors of this uptake (Carrier et al. 2006). It
is noteworthy, therefore, that CBD has been found to: (1) decrease the uptake of [3H]adenosine into murine microglia and RAW264.7 macrophages; (2) bind to an adenosine transporter,
the equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1, at submicromolar concentrations; and (3) decrease
lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor-α production in mice in vivo in a manner that
could be prevented both by an antagonist of the adenosine A 2A receptor and by genetic deletion of this receptor (Carrier et al. 2006). Similarly, Liou et al. (2008) have found that CBD can
inhibit adenosine uptake into rat retinal microglial cells, that it can also oppose increases in tumor
necrosis factor-α production in rat retina in vivo that had been triggered by lipopolysaccharide,
and that this in vivo effect of CBD could be prevented by the adenosine A2A receptor antagonist,
ZM241385. More recently, this antagonist was also found to oppose anti-inflammatory effects
induced by CBD in vivo in a mouse model of acute lung injury (Ribeiro et al. 2012). There has
been a report too that the ability of intracerebrally injected CBD to reduce tail flick-related nociception in anesthetized rats can be prevented by intracerebral administration of the selective
adenosine A1 receptor antagonist, DPCPX (Maione et al. 2011).
7.3.2.4 Other actions that CBD seems to display in vivo

There is also some evidence that CBD can interact with TRPA1 and TRPV1 cation channels, α3
glycine ligand-gated ion channels, and the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ)
not only in vitro (Tables 7.1 and 7.2) but also in vivo.

KNOWN PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF NINE NONPSYCHOTROPIC PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

7.3.2.4.1 TRP cation channels Long et al. (2006) have found that the ability of CBD to reverse

disruption of prepulse inhibition induced by MK-801 in mice in vivo could be prevented by the
TRPV1 antagonist, capsazepine. It is also possible that TRPV1 activation could be at least partly
responsible for the bell shape of some dose–response curves produced by CBD in vivo (e.g., see
section 7.3.2.2) (Campos et al. 2012). There has also been a report that the ability of CBD injected
into the ventrolateral periaqueductal gray to reduce tail flick-related nociception in anesthetized
rats could be prevented by the TRPA1-selective antagonist, AP18, and, albeit less strongly, by the
TRPV1 selective antagonist, 5′-iodo-resiniferatoxin, when they were injected into this brain area
(Maione et al. 2011). It is noteworthy, however, that this effect of CBD was also blocked by the
CB1-selective antagonist, AM251 (section 7.3.1), the 5-HT1A-selective antagonist, WAY100635
(section 7.3.2.2), and the adenosine A1-selective antagonist, DPCPX (section 7.3.2.3).
7.3.2.4.2 Glycine ligand-gated ion channels It has been found by Xiong et al. (2012) that genetic

deletion of the α3 glycine channel, although not of the cannabinoid CB 1 or CB2 receptor, can
abolish suppression by CBD (50 mg kg−1 i.p.) of signs of inflammatory pain produced in mice by
injecting complete Freund’s adjuvant into a hind paw.

7.3.2.4.3 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ) Esposito et al. (2011) have

found that the ability of CBD (10 mg kg−1 i.p.) to produce neuroprotective effects in an in vivo
model of Alzheimer’s disease when it was administered repeatedly could be completely prevented
by the selective PPARγ antagonist, GW9662, although not by the selective PPARα antagonist,
MK886. This was a model in which neuroinflammation was induced in rats by intrahippocampal
injection of fibrillar Aβ peptide.

7.4 Cannabidiolic acid (CBDA)
The pharmacology of CBDA, the natural precursor of CBD in cannabis, has as yet been little investigated. What has been found so far, from in vitro experiments, is that this phytocannabinoid can
target the receptor GPR55 and the cation channels TRPA1, TRPV1, and TRPM8, albeit only at concentrations between 1 and 10 µM (Table 7.1). At even higher concentrations, CBDA has also been
reported to activate the cation channel, TRPV1, and to inhibit the enzymes, N-acylethanolaminehydrolyzing acid amidase (NAAH) and diacylglycerol lipase α (DAGLα) (Tables 7.1 and 7.2).
Consistent with the presence of a salicylic acid moiety in its structure, CBDA has, in addition,
been reported be a cyclooxygenase inhibitor (Table 7.2). Thus, Takeda et al. (2008) have found that
CBDA can inhibit both cycooxygenase-1 (IC50 = 20 µM) and c­ yclooxygenase-2 (IC50 = 2.2 µM).
In contrast, CBD, which does not have a salicyclic acid moiety in its structure, did not inhibit
either of these enzymes significantly even at a concentration of 100 µM. More recently, however,
Ruhaak et al. (2011) reported that CBDA inhibited cyclooxygenase-1 with much lower potency
(IC50 = 470 µM), and cyclooxygenase-2 by less than 30%, even at a concentration of 27.8 µM.
Like Takeda et al. (2008), they also found CBD, and indeed Δ9-THC, to lack significant activity for
the inhibition of either of these enzymes.
In contrast, CBDA does appear to share the ability of CBD (sections 7.3.2.1 and 7.3.2.2) to
display marked potency, both in vitro and in vivo, as an enhancer of 5-HT1A receptor activation
(Bolognini et al. 2013). Thus, in vitro experiments have shown that, at concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 100 nM, CBDA can significantly increase the maximal stimulatory effect of
8-OH-DPAT on [35S]GTPγS binding to rat brainstem membranes. The dose–response curve of
CBDA for the production of this effect was bell-shaped, as no such enhancement was produced
by CBDA at concentrations of either 0.01 nM or 1 µM. It is also noteworthy that CBDA produced

147

148

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

this effect over a wider concentration range and with greater potency than CBD, as indicated by
data obtained with CBD in a previous investigation (section 7.3.2.1). Turning now to the in vivo
experiments, these showed first, that CBDA (0.01 and 0.1 mg kg−1 i.p.) suppressed nausea-like
behavior in rats, and second, that this effect could be blocked by the selective 5-HT1A receptor antagonist, WAY100635, but not by the selective CB1 receptor antagonist/inverse agonist,
SR141716A (rimonabant). Again, the dose–response curve of CBDA was bell-shaped: no anti­
nausea effect was produced by this phytocannabinoid at doses of 0.5 or 5 mg kg−1 i.p. The manner
in which CBDA interacted with 5-HT1A receptors in these experiments remains to be established,
since (like CBD) it did not displace [3H]8-OH-DPAT from specific binding sites in rat brainstem
membranes at concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 1000 nM. Bolognini et al. (2013) also found
that, in contrast to CBD (section 7.3.1), CBDA did not display significant activity as either an
agonist or an inverse agonist at cannabinoid CB1 receptors in mouse whole brain membranes,
even at a concentration 100,000-fold higher than a concentration (0.1 nM) at which it potentiated
8-OH-DPAT in rat brainstem membranes.

7.5 Cannabigerol (CBG)
CBG (Fig 7.1, Tables 7.2–7.4), is a little-investigated phytocannabinoid that has been found not
to induce Δ9-THC-like psychotropic effects in vivo (Grunfeld and Edery 1969). The structure of
CBG was first established by Gaoni and Mechoulam who also performed the first synthesis of this
compound (Gaoni and Mechoulam 1971). Effects that CBG has been found to produce in vitro at
concentrations in the submicromolar range (Table 7.4) include:
◆

◆

displacement of [3H]CP55940 from specific binding sites on mouse brain membranes with a
Ki value of 381 nM (Cascio et al. 2010)
α2-adrenoceptor agonism in both mouse brain (EC 50 = 0.2 nM) and mouse vas deferens
(EC50 = 72.8 nM)

◆

antagonism of the cation channel, TRPM8 (IC50 = 160 nM)

◆

activation of the cation channel, TRPA1 (EC50 = 700 nM) (De Petrocellis et al. 2011).

Evidence has also been obtained from in vitro experiments that CBG can oppose the activation of
both CB1 and 5-HT1A receptors with significant potency. Thus, it has been found to antagonize
the stimulation of [35S]GTPγS binding to mouse whole brain membranes by the 5-HT1A receptor
agonist, 8-OH-DPAT, at 1 µM, and by the CB1/CB2 receptor agonists, anandamide and CP55040,
at 10 µM (Cascio et al. 2010). The apparent KB values of CBG for this antagonism, which appeared
to be competitive in nature, were in the submicromolar range: 19.6 nM, 483 nM and 936 nM, for
the antagonism of 8-OH-DPAT, anandamide and CP55940, respectively. There is evidence as well
that CBG can activate α2-adrenoceptors and block 5-HT1A receptors when administered in vivo.
7.5.1 Evidence that CBG can activate α2-adrenoceptors in vivo

Evidence has recently emerged that CBG can act through α2-adrenoceptors in mice to induce
signs of antinociception. Thus, Comelli et al. (2012) have reported that CBG (10 mg kg−1 i.p.)
shares the ability of the established α2-adrenoceptor agonist, clonidine (0.2 mg kg−1 i.p.), to reduce
signs of persistent inflammatory pain that were induced by injecting formalin or λ-carrageenan
into the hind paws of mice. The pain behavior induced by formalin usually occurs in two phases:
a short, transient early phase that is followed a few minutes later by a slightly longer late phase
(Guindon and Hohmann, 2008). CBG and clonidine displayed antinociceptive activity in both
these phases. Importantly, at a dose of 1 mg kg−1 i.p., the α2-adrenoceptor antagonist, yohimbine,
significantly attenuated antinociception induced by CBG and clonidine both in the λ-carrageenan

Table 7.4 A selection of receptors and ion channels that CBG, CBGV, CBGA, THCA, or THCVA has
been reported to target in vitro
Compound and its
concentration§

Pharmacological target and effect

Reference

Receptors and channels
CBG

< 1 µM

CB1 receptor (D)

Cascio et al. 2010

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis et al. 2008, 2011

α2-adrenoceptor (A)

Cascio et al. 2010

CB1 receptor (B)

Cascio et al. 2010

CB2 receptor (D)

Cascio et al. 2010

5-HT1A receptor (B)

Cascio et al. 2010

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2008

TRPV1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV2 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV3 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV2 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV3 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

>10 µM

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

1–10 µM

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV3 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis et al. 2008, 2011

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2008

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

1–10 µM

CBGV

CBGA

1–10 µM

>10 µM

THCA

< 1 µM

1–10 µM

THCVA

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

>10 µM

TRPV2 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

1–10 µM

TRPV4 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

TRPM8 cation channel (B)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPA1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV1 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2011

TRPV3 cation channel (A)

De Petrocellis et al. 2012

>10 µM

Abbreviations: A, activation; B, blockade; CBG, cannabigerol; CBGV, cannabigevarin; CBGA cannabigerolic acid; D,
­displacement of [3H]CP55940 from specific binding sites; THCA, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid; THCVA,
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid; TRP, transient receptor potential. † review article; § EC50 or IC50 when this has been
determined.

150

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

test and in the late phase, but not the early phase, of the formalin test. That CBG is able to interact
with the α2-adrenoceptor and shares the ability of clonidine to modulate pain in animals is very
interesting, since the chemical structure of CBG differs greatly from that of well-established α2adrenoceptors ligands. Hence, CBG may constitute a lead compound for the development of a
new class of α2-adrenoceptor agonists/analgesic drugs.
7.5.2 Evidence that CBG can block 5HT1A receptors in vivo

In vivo evidence that CBG is a 5-HT1A receptor antagonist has come from the finding that it
can prevent the 5-HT1A receptor agonist, 8-OH-DPAT, from inducing antinausea effects in rats
with significant potency (5 mg kg−1 i.p.) (Rock et al. 2011a). Since there is evidence that CBD
can induce a 5-HT1A receptor-mediated attenuation of both nausea in rats and vomiting in
shrews (section 7.3.2.1), it is also noteworthy that CBG (5 mg kg−1 i.p.) has been found to prevent
CBD-induced suppression of both lithium chloride-induced nausea in rats and lithium chlorideinduced vomiting in shrews (Rock et al. 2011a).

7.6 Other phytocannabinoids
7.6.1 Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA),

Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid (THCVA),
and cannabigerolic acid (CBGA)

THCA, THCVA, and CBGA (Fig 7.1, Tables 7.1 and 7.2) are the immediate natural precursors
in cannabis of THC, THCV, and CBG, respectively. As indicated in Table 7.4, in vitro experiments already performed with these compounds have provided evidence that they can block the
activation of TRPM8 cation channels, activate certain other TRP cation channels, or desensitize
some of these channels to activation by an agonist. More specifically, there have been reports (De
Petrocellis et al. 2011, 2012) that at concentrations of 10 µM or less:
◆

◆

◆

THCA blocks TRPM8 (IC50 = 150 nM), activates TRPA1 and TRPV4 (EC50 = 2.7 and 3.4 µM,
respectively), and desensitizes TRPV2 and TRPV4 cation channels (IC50 = 9.8 and 8.8 µM,
respectively)
THCVA blocks TRPM8 (IC 50 = 1.33 µM) and activates TRPV4 cation channels (EC 50 =
4.4 µM)
CBGA blocks TRPM8 (IC50 = 1.31 µM), activates TRPA1 (EC50 = 8.4 µM), and desensitizes
TRPA1, TRPV3, and TRPV4 cation channels (IC50 = 7.14, 7.4, and 3.6 µM, respectively).

Reported effects of higher concentrations of these three phytocannabinoids on TRP cation channels are also listed in Table 7.4. In addition, THCA and CBGA, but not THCVA, have been found
to inhibit DAGLα, monoacylglycerol lipase, cyclooxygenase-1, and/or cyclooxygenase-2, again at
concentrations above 10 µM (Table 7.2). Finally, as indicated in Fig 7.1, there are both A and B
forms of THCA, THCVA, and CBGA, and it is not always clear whether it was the A or the B form
that was used in the investigations mentioned in this section or in Tables 7.2 and 7.4.
7.6.2 Cannabidivarin (CBDV) and cannabigerovarin (CBGV)

Relatively few in vitro experiments have so far been performed with CBDV and CBGV (Fig.
7.1). These have provided evidence that both compounds can block the activation of TRPM8
cation channels, activate certain other TRP channels, and desensitize some of these channels to

KNOWN PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF NINE NONPSYCHOTROPIC PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

activation by an agonist (Table 7.4). More specifically, it has been reported by De Petrocellis et al.
(2011, 2012) that:
◆
◆

◆

CBDV and CBGV can block the activation of TRPM8 (IC50 = 0.9 and 1.71 µM, respectively)
CBDV can both activate TRPA1, TRPV1, TRPV2, TRPV3, and TRPV4 (EC50 = 0.42, 3.6, 7.3,
1.7, and 0.9 µM, respectively), and desensitize these cation channels (IC50 = 1.29, 10.0, 31.1,
25.2, and 2.9 µM, respectively)
CBGV can also activate all these TRPA and TRPV cation channels (EC50 = 1.6, 2.0, 1.41,
2.4, and 22.2 µM, respectively), and desensitize them (IC50 = 2.02, 2.3, 0.7, 0.8, and 1.8 µM,
­respectively).

It has been reported too by De Petrocellis et al. (2011) that CBDV, but not CBGV, can inhibit:
(1) NAAA, which catalyzes the metabolic degradation of palmitoylethanolamide; (2) a second
enzyme, DAGLα; and (3) the cellular uptake of anandamide, albeit in each case only at rather high
concentrations (Tables 7.2 and 7.3).

7.7 Conclusions and future directions
In conclusion it is now generally accepted that three of the nine phytocannabinoids featured
in this review each displays significant potency at producing at least one action that has been
detected both in vitro and in vivo. These actions are:
◆

the potentiation of 5-HT1A receptor activation by CBDA and CBD

◆

the inhibition of the cellular uptake of adenosine by CBD

◆

the activation of α2-adrenoceptors by CBG

◆

the antagonism of 5-HT1A receptors by CBG

◆

the targeting of certain TRP cation channels by CBD and CBG.

Further research is now needed to investigate the extent to which these actions could be exploited
therapeutically. It could well be, for example, that in the clinic: (1) CBDA would induce a 5-HT1Amediated suppression of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, (2) CBG would induce
α2-adrenoceptor-mediated analgesia and perhaps also reduce negative signs of schizophrenia
through the blockade of 5-HT1A receptors, and (3) CBD might induce PPARγ-mediated neuroprotective effects in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease. It will also be
important to complete the pharmacological characterization, not only of the phytocannabinoids
mentioned in this review, and of their metabolites, but also of the many other as yet uninvestigated phytocannabinoids that are known to be present in cannabis. Such research would advance
our understanding not only of the therapeutic potential of individual phytocannabinoids, administered alone or together with one or more other phytocannabinoid or with nonphytocannabinoid, but also of the likely myriad of pharmacological effects produced by cannabis when it is
self-administered either as a recreational drug or for self-medication.

References
Ahrens, J., Demir, R., Leuwer, M., et al. (2009). The nonpsychotropic cannabinoid cannabidiol modulates
and directly activates alpha-1 and alpha-1-beta glycine receptor function. Pharmacology, 83, 217–222.
Anavi-Goffer, S., Baillie, G., Irving, A.J., et al. (2012). Modulation of L-alpha-lysophosphatidylinositol/
GPR55 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling by cannabinoids. Journal of Biological
Chemistry, 287, 91–104.

151

152

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Banerjee, S.P., Snyder, S.H., and Mechoulam, R. (1975). Cannabinoids: influence on neurotransmitter
uptake in rat brain synaptosomes. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 194, 74–81.
Bolognini, D., Rock, E., Cascio, M.G., et al. (2013). Cannabidiolic acid prevents vomiting in Suncus murinus and nausea-induced behaviour in rats by enhancing 5-HT1A receptor activation. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 168, 1456–1470.
Brown, N.K. and Harvey, D.J. (1990). In vitro metabolism of cannabichromene in 7 common laboratory
animals. Drug Metabolism and Disposition, 18, 1065–1070.
Campos, A.C., Ferreira, F.R., and Guimarães, F.S. (2012). Cannabidiol blocks long-lasting behavioral
consequences of predator threat stress: possible involvement of 5HT1A receptors. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 46, 1501–1510.
Campos, A.C. and Guimarães, F.S. (2008). Involvement of 5HT1A receptors in the anxiolytic-like effects of
cannabidiol injected into the dorsolateral periaqueductal gray of rats. Psychopharmacology, 199, 223–230.
Campos, A.C., Moreira, F.A., Gomes, F.V., Del Bel, E.A., and Guimarães, F.S. (2012). Multiple mechanisms involved in the large-spectrum therapeutic potential of cannabidiol in psychiatric disorders.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 367, 3364–3378.
Carrier, E.J., Auchampach, J.A., and Hillard, C.J. (2006). Inhibition of an equilibrative nucleoside transporter by cannabidiol: a mechanism of cannabinoid immunosuppression. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103, 7895–7900.
Casarotto, P.C., Gomes, F.V., Resstel, L.B.M., and Guimara, F.S. (2010). Cannabidiol inhibitory effect on
marble-burying behaviour: involvement of CB1 receptors. Behavioural Pharmacology, 21, 353–358.
Cascio, M.G., Gauson, L.A., Stevenson, L.A., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2010). Evidence that the
plant cannabinoid cannabigerol is a highly potent alpha(2)-adrenoceptor agonist and moderately potent
5HT(1A) receptor antagonist. British Journal of Pharmacology, 159, 129–141.
Comelli, F., Filippi, G., Papaleo, E., De Gioaia, L., Pertwee, R.G., and Costa, B. (2012). Evidence that the
phytocannabinoid cannabigerol can induce antinociception by activating α2-adrenoceptors: a computational and pharmacological study. In: Symposium on the Cannabinoids. Freiburg: International
Cannabinoid Research Society, p. 44.
Davis, W.M. and Hatoum, N.S. (1983). Neurobehavioral actions of cannabichromene and interactions with
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol. General Pharmacology, 14, 247–252.
de Paula Soares, V., Campos, A.C., de Bortoli, V.C., Zangrossi, H., Guimarães, F.S., and Zuardi, A.W.
(2010). Intra-dorsal periaqueductal gray administration of cannabidiol blocks panic-like response by
activating 5-HT1A receptors. Behavioural Brain Research, 213, 225–229.
De Petrocellis, L., Ligresti, A., Moriello, A.S., et al. (2011). Effects of cannabinoids and cannabinoidenriched Cannabis extracts on TRP channels and endocannabinoid metabolic enzymes. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 163, 1479–1494.
De Petrocellis, L., Orlando, P., Moriello, A.S., et al. (2012). Cannabinoid actions at TRPV channels: effects
on TRPV3 and TRPV4 and their potential relevance to gastrointestinal inflammation. Acta Physiologica,
204, 255–266.
De Petrocellis, L., Vellani, V., Schiano-Moriello, A., et al. (2008). Plant-derived cannabinoids modulate
the activity of transient receptor potential channels of ankyrin type-1 and melastatin type-8. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 325, 1007–1015.
Esposito, G., Scuderi, C., Valenza, M., et al. (2011). Cannabidiol reduces Aβ-induced neuroinflammation
and promotes hippocampal neurogenesis through PPARγ involvement. PLoS ONE, 6, e28668.
Evans, F.J. (1991). Cannabinoids – the separation of central from peripheral effects on a structural basis.
Planta Medica, 57, S60–S67.
Fernández-Ruiz, J., Sagredo, O., Pazos, M.R., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol for neurodegenerative disorders:
important new clinical applications for this phytocannabinoid? British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology,
75, 323–333.

KNOWN PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF NINE NONPSYCHOTROPIC PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Funahashi, T., Ikeuchi, H., Yamaori, S., Kimura, T., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2005). In vitro
inhibitory effects of cannabinoids on progesterone 17 alpha-hydroxylase activity in rat testis microsomes. Journal of Health Science, 51, 369–375.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1971). The isolation and structure of Δ1-tetrahydrocannabinol and other
neutral cannabinoids from hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 93, 217–224.
Gomes, F.V., Reis, D.G., Alves, F.H.F., Correa, F.M.A., Guimaraes, F.S., and Resstel, L.B.M. (2012).
Cannabidiol injected into the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis reduces the expression of contextual
fear conditioning via 5-HT1A receptors. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 26, 104–113.
Gomes, F.V., Resstel, L.B.M., and Guimarães, F.S. (2011). The anxiolytic-like effects of cannabidiol injected into the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis are mediated by 5-HT1A receptors. Psychopharmacology,
213, 465–473.
Grunfeld, Y. and Edery, H. (1969). Psychopharmacological activity of the active constituents of hashish
and some related cannabinoids. Psychopharmacologia, 14, 200–210.
Guindon, J. and Hohmann, A.G. (2008). Cannabinoid CB2 receptors: a therapeutic target for the treatment
of inflammatory and neuropathic pain. British Journal of Pharmacology, 153, 319–334.
Izzo, A.A., Borrelli, F., Capasso, R., Di Marzo, V., and Mechoulam, R. (2009). Non-psychotropic plant
cannabinoids: new therapeutic opportunities from an ancient herb: Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 30 (2009)
515–527. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 30, 609.
Jenny, M., Santer, E., Pirich, E., Schennach, H., and Fuchs, D. (2009). Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol and
cannabidiol modulate mitogen-induced tryptophan degradation and neopterin formation in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells in vitro. Journal of Neuroimmunology, 207, 75–82.
Koch, M., Dehghani, F., Habazettl, I., Schomerus, C., and Korf, H.W. (2006). Cannabinoids attenuate
norepinephrine-induced melatonin biosynthesis in the rat pineal gland by reducing arylalkylamine
N-acetyltransferase activity without involvement of cannabinoid receptors. Journal of Neurochemistry,
98, 267–278.
Kwiatkowska, M., Parker, L.A., Burton, P., and Mechoulam, R. (2004). A comparative analysis of the
potential of cannabinoids and ondansetron to suppress cisplatin-induced emesis in the Suncus murinus
(house musk shrew). Psychopharmacology, 174, 254–259.
Ligresti, A., Moriello, A.S., Starowicz, K., et al. (2006). Antitumor activity of plant cannabinoids with
emphasis on the effect of cannabidiol on human breast carcinoma. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 318, 1375–1387.
Liou, G.I., Auchampach, J.A., Hillard, C.J., et al. (2008). Mediation of cannabidiol anti-inflammation
in the retina by equilibrative nucleoside transporter and A2A adenosine receptor. Investigative
Ophthalmology & Visual Science, 49, 5526–5531.
Long, L.E., Malone, D.T., and Taylor, D.A. (2006). Cannabidiol reverses MK-801-induced disruption of
prepulse inhibition in mice. Neuropsychopharmacology, 31, 795–803.
Lunn, C.A., Fine, J.S., Rojas-Triana, A., et al. (2006). A novel cannabinoid peripheral cannabinoid
receptor-selective inverse agonist blocks leukocyte recruitment in vivo. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 316, 780–788.
Magen, I., Avraham, Y., Ackerman, Z., Vorobiev, L., Mechoulam, R., and Berry, E.M. (2010).
Cannabidiol ameliorates cognitive and motor impairments in bile-duct ligated mice via 5-HT1A receptor activation. British Journal of Pharmacology, 159, 950–957.
Maione, S., Piscitelli, F., Gatta, L., et al. (2011). Non-psychoactive cannabinoids modulate the descending
pathway of antinociception in anaesthetized rats through several mechanisms of action. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 162, 584–596.
Massi, P., Vaccani, A., Bianchessi, S., Costa, B., Macchi, P., and Parolaro, D. (2006). The non-­psychoactive
cannabidiol triggers caspase activation and oxidative stress in human glioma cells. Cellular and Molecular
Life Sciences, 63, 2057–2066.

153

154

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

McHugh, D. and Ross, R.A. (2005). Endocannabinoids and phytocannabinoids inhibit human neutrophil
migration. In: Symposium on the Cannabinoids. Burlington, VT: International Cannabinoid Research
Society, p. 38.
McHugh, D., Page, J., Dunn, E., and Bradshaw, H.B. (2012). Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and N-arachidonyl
glycine are full agonists at GPR18 receptors and induce migration in human endometrial HEC-1B cells.
British Journal of Pharmacology, 165, 2414–2424.
Mechoulam, R. and Hanus, L. (2002). Cannabidiol: an overview of some chemical and pharmacological
aspects. Part I: chemical aspects. Chemistry and Physics of Lipids, 121, 35–43.
Mishima, K., Hayakawa, K., Abe, K., et al. (2005). Cannabidiol prevents cerebral infarction via a serotonergic 5-hydroxytryptamine1A receptor-dependent mechanism. Stroke, 36, 1071–1076.
Nagai, K., Watanabe, K., Narimatsu, S., et al. (1993). In vitro metabolic formation of a new metabolite,
6β-hydroxymethyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol from cannabidiol through an epoxide intermediate and its
pharmacological effects on mice. Biological & Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 16, 1008–1013.
Parker, L.A., Kwiatkowska, M., Burton, P., and Mechoulam, R. (2004). Effect of cannabinoids on lithiuminduced vomiting in the Suncus murinus (house musk shrew). Psychopharmacology, 171, 156–161.
Parker, L.A., Kwiatkowska, M., and Mechoulam, R. (2006). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol,
but not ondansetron, interfere with conditioned retching reactions elicited by a lithium-paired context in
Suncus murinus: an animal model of anticipatory nausea and vomiting. Physiology & Behavior, 87, 66–71.
Pertwee, R.G. (2004a). The pharmacology and therapeutic potential of cannabidiol. In: V. Di Marzo (ed.).
Cannabinoids. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, pp. 32–83.
Pertwee, R.G. (2004b). Pharmacological and therapeutic targets for Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol. Euphytica, 140, 73–82.
Pertwee, R.G. (2008). The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology of three plant cannabinoids: Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin. British Journal of Pharmacology,
153, 199–215.
Pertwee, R.G., Howlett, A.C., Abood, M.E., et al. (2010). International Union of Basic and Clinical
Pharmacology. LXXIX. Cannabinoid receptors and their ligands: beyond CB1 and CB2. Pharmacological
Reviews, 62, 588–631.
Pertwee, R.G., Ross, R.A., Craib, S.J., and Thomas, A. (2002). (−)-Cannabidiol antagonizes cannabinoid
receptor agonists and noradrenaline in the mouse vas deferens. European Journal of Pharmacology, 456,
99–106.
Petitet, F., Jeantaud, B., Reibaud, M., Imperato, A., and Dubroeucq, M.-C. (1998). Complex pharmacology of natural cannabinoids: evidence for partial agonist activity of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol and antagonist activity of cannabidiol on rat brain cannabinoid receptors. Life Sciences, 63, PL1–PL6.
Rakhshan, F., Day, T.A., Blakely, R.D., and Barker, E.L. (2000). Carrier-mediated uptake of the endogenous cannabinoid anandamide in RBL-2H3 cells. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, 292, 960–967.
Resstel, L.B.M., Tavares, R.F., Lisboa, S.F.S., Joca, S.R.L., Corrêa, F.M.A., and Guimarães, F.S. (2009).
5-HT1A receptors are involved in the cannabidiol-induced attenuation of behavioural and cardiovascular responses to acute restraint stress in rats. British Journal of Pharmacology, 156, 181–188.
Ribeiro, A., Ferraz-de-Paula, V., Pinheiro, M.L., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol, a non-psychotropic plantderived cannabinoid, decreases inflammation in a murine model of acute lung injury: role for the
adenosine A2A receptor. European Journal of Pharmacology, 678, 78–85.
Rock, E.M., Bolognini, D., Limebeer, C.L., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol, a non-psychotropic component of
cannabis, attenuates vomiting and nausea-like behaviour via indirect agonism of 5-HT1A somatodendritic autoreceptors in the dorsal raphe nucleus. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165, 2620–2634.
Rock, E.M., Goodwin, J.M., Limebeer, C.L., et al. (2011a). Interaction between non-psychotropic cannabinoids in marihuana: effect of cannabigerol (CBG) on the anti-nausea or anti-emetic effects of cannabidiol (CBD) in rats and shrews. Psychopharmacology, 215, 505–512.

KNOWN PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS OF NINE NONPSYCHOTROPIC PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Rock, E.M., Limebeer, C.L., Mechoulam, R., Piomelli, D., and Parker, L.A. (2011b). The effect of cannabidiol and URB597 on conditioned gaping (a model of nausea) elicited by a lithium-paired context in
the rat. Psychopharmacology, 196, 389–395.
Ross, H.R., Napier, I., and Connor, M. (2008). Inhibition of recombinant human T-type calcium channels
by Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 283, 16124–16134.
Ruhaak, L.R., Felth, J., Karlsson, P.C., Rafter, J.J., Verpoorte, R., and Bohlin, L. (2011). Evaluation of the
cyclooxygenase inhibiting effects of six major cannabinoids isolated from Cannabis sativa. Biological &
Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 34, 774–778.
Russo, E.B., Burnett, A., Hall, B., and Parker, K.K. (2005). Agonistic properties of cannabidiol at 5-HT1a
receptors. Neurochemical Research, 30, 1037–1043.
Sacerdote, P., Martucci, C., Vaccani, A., et al. (2005). The nonpsychoactive component of marijuana cannabidiol modulates chemotaxis and IL-10 and IL-12 production of murine macrophages both in vivo
and in vitro. Journal of Neuroimmunology, 159, 97–105.
Sreevalsan, S., Joseph, S., Jutooru, I., Chadalapaka, G., and Safe, S.H. (2011). Induction of apoptosis by
cannabinoids in prostate and colon cancer cells is phosphatase dependent. Anticancer Research, 31,
3799–3807.
Takeda, S., Misawa, K., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2008). Cannabidiolic acid as a selective
­cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitory component in cannabis. Drug Metabolism and Disposition, 36, 1917–1921.
Takeda, S., Usami, N., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2009). Cannabidiol-2',6'-dimethyl ether, a cannabidiol derivative, is a highly potent and selective 15-lipoxygenase inhibitor. Drug Metabolism and
Disposition, 37, 1733–1737.
Thomas, A., Baillie, G.L., Phillips, A.M., Razdan, R.K., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2007). Cannabidiol
displays unexpectedly high potency as an antagonist of CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists in vitro. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 613–623.
Usami, N., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2008). Generation of reactive oxygen species during mouse
hepatic microsomal metabolism of cannabidiol and cannabidiol hydroxy-quinone. Life Sciences, 83,
717–724.
Walter, L., Franklin, A., Witting, A., et al. (2003). Nonpsychotropic cannabinoid receptors regulate microglial cell migration. Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 1398–1405.
Watanabe, K., Motoya, E., and Matsuzawa, N., et al. (2005). Marijuana extracts possess the effects like the
endocrine disrupting chemicals. Toxicology, 206, 471–478.
Xiong, W., Cui, T.X., Cheng, K.J., et al. (2012). Cannabinoids suppress inflammatory and neuropathic
pain by targeting α3 glycine receptors. Journal of Experimental Medicine, 209, 1121–1134.
Yamamoto, I., Watanabe, K., Matsunaga, T., Kimura, T., Funahashi, T., and Yoshimura, H. (2003).
Pharmacology and toxicology of major constituents of marijuana – on the metabolic activation of cannabinoids and its mechanism. Journal of Toxicology – Toxin Reviews, 22, 577–589.
Yamaori, S., Ebisawa, J., Okushima, Y., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2011a). Potent inhibition of
human cytochrome P450 3A isoforms by cannabidiol: role of phenolic hydroxyl groups in the resorcinol
moiety. Life Sciences, 88, 730–736.
Yamaori, S., Koeda, K., Kushihara, M., Hada, Y., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2012). Comparison in the
in vitro inhibitory effects of major phytocannabinoids and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons contained in
marijuana smoke on cytochrome P450 2C9 activity. Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, 27, 294–300.
Yamaori, S., Kushihara, M., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2010). Characterization of major phytocannabinoids, cannabidiol and cannabinol, as isoform-selective and potent inhibitors of human CYP1
enzymes. Biochemical Pharmacology, 79, 1691–1698.
Yamaori, S., Maeda, C., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2011b). Differential inhibition of human cytochrome P450 2A6 and 2B6 by major phytocannabinoids. Forensic Toxicology, 29, 117–124.
Yamaori, S., Okamoto, Y., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2011c). Cannabidiol, a major phytocannabinoid, as a potent atypical inhibitor for CYP2D6. Drug Metabolism and Disposition, 39, 2049–2056.

155

156

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Yang, K.H., Galadari, S., Isaev, D., Petroianu, G., Shippenberg, T.S., and Oz, M. (2010). The nonpsychoactive cannabinoid cannabidiol inhibits 5-hydroxytryptamine3A receptor-mediated currents in Xenopus
laevis oocytes. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 333, 547–554.
Zanelati, T.V., Biojone, C., Moreira, F.A., Guimaraes, F.S., and Joca, S.R.L. (2010). Antidepressantlike effects of cannabidiol in mice: possible involvement of 5-HT1A receptors. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 159, 122–128.
Zhu, H.J., Wang, J.S., Markowitz, J.S., et al. (2006). Characterization of P-glycoprotein inhibition by major
cannabinoids from marijuana. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 317, 850–857.

Chapter 8

Effects of Phytocannabinoids on
Neurotransmission in the Central
and Peripheral Nervous Systems
Bela Szabo

8.1 Introduction
This chapter focuses on the neuronal effects of phytocannabinoids. Phytocannabinoids are constituents of Cannabis sativa. Fig. 8.1 shows the chemical structures of some important phytocannabinoids. Only a few phytocannabinoids have known effects on synaptic transmission, and the
effects of these compounds will be discussed: delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC), delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin (Δ9-THCV), cannabinol, cannabidiol, and cannabigerol. It is important
to note that far more information is available on the effects on neuronal systems of Δ9-THC than
of these other phytocannabinoids.

8.2 Interaction of phytocannabinoids with cannabinoid receptors
Here the basic interactions of neuronally active phytocannabinoids with the G protein-coupled
cannabinoid receptors type 1 (CB1) and type 2 (CB2), are described. Δ9- and Δ8-THC are partial
agonists of both receptors (Bayewitch et al. 1996; Breivogel et al. 2004; Kelley and Thayer 2004;
Shen and Thayer 1998; Sim et al. 1996). Cannabinol is a low-potency partial agonist at CB1 and
CB2 receptors (Bayewitch et al. 1996; Munro et al. 1993; Rhee et al. 1997; Showalter et al. 1996;
Thomas et al. 1998). In some studies, Δ9-THCV behaves as a CB2 agonist and CB1 inverse agonist
(Bolognini et al. 2010), in other studies as a CB1 and CB2 receptor antagonist (Ma et al. 2008;
Pertwee et al. 2007; Thomas et al. 2005). Cannabidiol possesses only low affinity for CB1 and
CB2 receptors in radioligand binding studies (Showalter et al. 1996; Thomas et al. 1998). In more
recent functional studies, cannabidiol appeared to be a rather potent antagonist of CB1 receptors and an antagonist/inverse agonist at CB2 receptors (Thomas et al. 2004, 2007). Remarkably,
cannabidiol is also an antagonist at the G protein-coupled receptor 55 (GPR55), a recently “deorphanized” receptor for which several phytocannabinoids, endocannabinoids, and synthetic cannabinoids possess affinity (Ryberg et al. 2007).

8.3 Distribution of cannabinoid receptors in the nervous system
Knowledge of the localization of cannabinoid receptors in the nervous system is important for
understanding the effects of cannabinoids on neurons.

158

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

OH

OH

(–)-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol

(–)-Δ8-tetrahydrocannabinol

O

O

O

OH

OH

cannabinol

O
(–)-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin
OH

OH
HO

Fig. 8.1 Chemical structures of
important phytocannabinoids.

OH
(–)-cannabidiol

cannabigerol

8.3.1 CB1 receptor

The CB1 receptor can be found at low concentration in some peripheral non-neuronal tissues,
for example, the heart, liver, fat tissue, stomach, and testis (Cota et al. 2003; Gerard et al. 1991;
Mukhopadhyay et al. 2007; Pazos et al. 2008; Shire et al. 1995; Staender et al. 2005; Teixeira-Clerc
et al. 2006). However, its main localization is in the nervous system. In situ hybridization studies, autoradiographic studies with radiolabeled cannabinoids, and immunohistochemical studies identified CB1 receptors in most brain regions (Cristino et al. 2006; Dove Pettit et al. 1998;
Egertova et al. 2003; Herkenham et al. 1991b; Matsuda et al. 1993; Tsou et al. 1998; Van Laere et
al. 2008; Westlake et al. 1994; for review see Mackie 2005). The high density of CB1 receptors in
the brain is remarkable: it is thought that compared with other G protein-coupled receptors CB1
receptors have the highest density in the brain. The concentration of CB1 receptors in the brainstem and in the spinal cord is relatively low.
CB1 receptors were also identified in the peripheral nervous system. Thus, CB 1 receptors are
found in some sensory neurons (e.g., Hohmann and Herkenham 1999; Ständer et al. 2005), in
many postganglionic sympathetic neurons (e.g., Calignano et al. 2000; Ishac et al. 1996), and in
neurons of the parasympathetic nervous system. The gut nervous system is also rich in CB1 receptors (e.g., Sibaev et al. 2009).
A characteristic feature of neuronal CB1 receptors is that after their synthesis in the somatodendritic region, they are transported to the axon terminals. The concentration of CB1 receptors
in the axonal membrane is usually much higher than in the membrane of the somatodendritic
region of neurons (Herkenham et al. 1991a; Katona et al. 1999; Leterrier et al. 2006; Nyiri et al.
2005; Yoshida et al. 2006).
8.3.2 CB2 receptor

Originally, the CB2 receptor was thought to be restricted to peripheral immune-related organs
like the tonsils, spleen, thymus, and bone marrow and to cells involved in immune responses like
B lymphocytes, monocytes, macrophages, mast cells, and microglial cells (Galiègue et al. 1995;

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON NEUROTRANSMISSION

Munro et al. 1993). However, more recent observations point to the presence of CB2 receptors
also in neurons. Thus, CB2 receptor mRNA or protein was shown to be present in a series of
regions: cerebral cortex, hippocampal pyramidal cells, globus pallidus, cerebellar Purkinje cells,
cerebellar granule cells, cerebellar nuclei, vestibular nuclei, dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus,
nucleus ambiguous, spinal trigeminal nucleus, and spinal sensory neurons (Brusco et al. 2008;
Gong et al. 2006; Lanciego et al. 2011; Skaper et al. 1996; Suarez et al. 2008; Van Sickle et al. 2005;
Wotherspoon et al. 2005). Compared with the CB1 receptors, the distribution of CB2 receptors in
the nervous system is more restricted, and the density of CB2 receptors is much lower.

8.4 Cannabinoids inhibit synaptic transmission
This chapter provides an overview of the main effects of cannabinoids on synaptic transmission.
Most of the knowledge in this field has been obtained by using certain synthetic cannabinoids that
behave consistently as full agonists of cannabinoid receptors, and whose use for research purposes
is not legally restricted.
8.4.1 Involvement of CB1 receptors

The most frequently reported neuronal effect of CB1 receptor agonists is inhibition of synaptic transmission (for review, see Freund et al. 2003; Szabo and Schlicker 2005). Fig. 8.2 shows
CB1 receptor-mediated inhibition of synaptic transmission schematically, and Fig. 8.3 shows an
example of synaptic inhibition by the synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist, WIN 55,212-2. It
has been shown that glutamatergic, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic, cholinergic, and
noradrenergic neurotransmission all are inhibited after activation of CB1 receptors, and inhibition has been shown in many regions of the central nervous system and in the peripheral nervous
system of several species. Inhibition of synaptic transmission after activation of CB1 receptors
has also been shown to occur in the human brain (Kovacs et al. 2011; Nakatsuka et al. 2003).
Corresponding to the presence of CB1 receptors in the presynaptic axon terminals, the basis of
the inhibition of synaptic transmission is inhibition of transmitter release from the axon terminals. Several mechanisms have been implicated in this presynaptic inhibition. Most frequently,
inhibition of axon terminal voltage-gated calcium channels has been shown to contribute to the
decrease in transmitter release resulting from CB1 receptor activation (see Fig. 8.2) (Brown et al.
2004; Engler et al. 2006; Kushmerick et al. 2004). In many cases, direct inhibition of the vesicular
release machinery after CB1 receptor activation has also been found to contribute to the decrease
in transmitter release (e.g., Freiman et al. 2006; Szabo et al. 2004). It is thought that voltage-gated
calcium channels and the vesicle release machinery are inhibited by the βγ-subunits released from
the heterotrimeric G protein complex (Blackmer et al. 2005) (Fig. 8.2). Some evidence exists also
for the involvement of axon terminal potassium channels in the presynaptic inhibition of transmitter release by cannabinoids (e.g., Daniel et al. 2004).
Compared with the ubiquitous presynaptic inhibition seen after the activation of CB1 receptors,
somatodendritic effects of CB1 agonists are usually not observed. Thus, for example, there have
been reports that in neurons which synthesize CB1 receptors, a CB1 receptor-mediated inhibition
is seen at their axon terminals, whereas no CB1-mediated effects are detectable in the somatodendritic region of the same neurons (Freiman and Szabo 2005; Freiman et al. 2006). Although somatodendritic effects are usually not observed, signs of such effects have sometimes been detected.
For example, Bacci et al. (2004) have shown that low-threshold-spiking neocortical interneurons
respond with hyperpolarization to an endocannabinoid released by the neuron itself, and that this
process was mediated by CB1 receptors.

159

NMDA-R
AM

PA

-R

ER

C
VG C

lapo n
de zatio
ri

IP3-R

presynaptic
axon terminal

Glu

C
VGC

Ca2+

Ca2+

/11

Gα
q

Cß

Gα i/o

PL

AG
D
DAGL

PIP2

Gβ/γ

CaM
CaMKinase II

IP3

mGluR

1

Ry-R

Glu

CB1-R

dri posts
te / yn
den apti
dri c
tic
spi

ne

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

den

160

Δ9-THC
WIN55212-2

2-AG

Fig. 8.2 Inhibition of synaptic transmission by exogenous cannabinoids and the endocannabinoid
2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) (retrograde signaling). Glutamate (Glu) released from the presynaptic axon terminal activates postsynaptic (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid
(AMPA), N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDA), and mGluR1 receptors. The CB1 receptor (CB1-R)
is localized at the presynaptic axon terminal. Its activation leads via Gαi/o- and Gβ/γ proteins to inhibition of voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs), direct inhibition of the synaptic vesicle release
machinery and finally to inhibition of glutamate release. The CB1-R can be activated by exogenous
cannabinoids (e.g., Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) and WIN 55,212-2) or by the endocannabinoid 2-AG. 2-AG is released from the dendritic spine of the postsynaptic neuron. 2-AG is produced
from phosphatidylinositol diphosphate (PIP2) via diacylglycerol (DAG) by the enzymes phospholipase
C-β (PLC-β) and diacylglycerol lipase (DAGL). The production of 2-AG can be stimulated by calcium, which flows into the neuron through VGCCs or the NMDA receptor/ion channel. Activation
of the Gαq/11 protein-coupled mGluR1 glutamate receptor can also trigger 2-AG production. After
retrograde diffusion through the synaptic cleft 2-AG activates the CB1 receptor at the presynaptic
axon terminal. The action of 2-AG is terminated by monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) localized at the
presynaptic site (not shown).

The presynaptic CB1 receptor can also be activated by endocannabinoids. Usually, an endocannabinoid is produced in the postsynaptic neuron, diffuses through the synaptic cleft
to the presynaptic axon terminal, and activates the CB 1 receptor there (see Fig. 8.2). This
­endocannabinoid-mediated retrograde signaling operates in many brain regions (for reviews,
see Castillo et al. 2012; Heifets and Castillo 2009; Kano et al. 2009; Lovinger 2008). The trigger
for endocannabinoid production in the postsynaptic neuron is an increase in the intracellular
calcium concentration or the activation of a Gαq/11 protein-coupled receptor on the surface of the
postsynaptic neuron (see Fig. 8.2). The endocannabinoid released from the postsynaptic neuron
has been repeatedly identified as 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) (e.g., Szabo et al. 2006; Tanimura
et al. 2010).

A

CB1 mRNA
AP

CB1 receptor protein

PV_FSN
MSN
IPSC

B

IPSC amplitude [pA]

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON NEUROTRANSMISSION

80

RIM 10−6 M
WIN 5 X 10−6 M

40
0
PRE
0

WIN+RIM

WIN
10

20

30

40

50 min

globus pallidus,
substantia nigra

B1

PRE

RIM+WIN

WIN

20 pA

5 ms

B2

Fig. 8.3 Inhibition of synaptic transmission by the synthetic cannabinoid agonist WIN 55,212-2.
The experiments that generated these data were performed on mouse brain slices containing the
caudate-putamen (see Freiman et al. 2006). (A) CB1 receptor mRNA and protein are localized in fast
spiking neurons (FSNs) and medium spiny neurons (MSNs) of the caudate-putamen. The presynaptic FSN was depolarized via a patch-clamp pipette to elicit action potentials (APs). The resulting
GABAergic inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) were registered with a patch-clamp pipette in the
postsynaptic MSN. (B) Course of the experiment: after the initial reference period (PRE) the synthetic
CB1/CB2 agonist WIN 55,212-2 (WIN) was superfused, followed later by the CB1 antagonist rimonabant (RIM). The points represent the amplitudes of the individual IPSCs. (B1) Individual synaptic
events (IPSCs) during the three phases of the experiment. (B2) Averages of synaptic events during
the three experimental phases. This experiment demonstrates a strong inhibition of FSN → MSN
synaptic transmission by the synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist. The antagonism by RIM verifies
the involvement of CB1 receptors.

8.4.2 Involvement of CB2 receptors

Neuronal effects have been repeatedly observed in vivo which can be best explained by involvement of neuronal CB2 receptors. For example, 2-AG inhibited emesis induced by morphine6-glucuronide in a CB2 receptor-dependent fashion (Van Sickle et al. 2005). Another example is
that activation of CB2 receptors leads to profound inhibition of mesolimbic dopaminergic neurons and interferes with the behavioral effects of cocaine (Xi et al. 2011). However, observations
of CB2 receptor-mediated effects on identified neurons are rare. It has been shown recently that
activation of CB2 receptors on pyramidal neurons of the prefrontal cortex leads to activation of
calcium-dependent chloride channels (den Boon et al. 2012).
A role for natural CB2 receptors in synaptic inhibition has not yet been demonstrated. In a recent
study it was shown, however, that activation of CB2 receptors artificially expressed in cultured
mouse hippocampal neurons can lead to presynaptic inhibition of synaptic transmission which
is very similar to the inhibition observed after activation of CB1 receptors (Atwood et al. 2012).

161

162

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

8.5 Effects of phytocannabinoids on synaptic transmission
8.5.1 Effects of Δ9-THC
8.5.1.1 Effects of Δ9-THC in the central nervous system

Most observations were made in patch-clamp electrophysiological experiments (Table 8.1). In
some studies, conclusions on synaptic transmission were drawn from observations of intracellular
calcium changes. Data exist only on glutamatergic and GABAergic neurotransmission, probably
because only neurotransmission by these two transmitters can be (easily) studied with electrophysiological techniques. When Δ9-THC inhibited synaptic transmission, the involvement of CB1
receptors was usually verified. When Δ9-THC inhibited synaptic transmission, the basis for this
was inhibition of transmitter release from the presynaptic axon terminal.
Surprisingly, the effects of Δ9-THC have been studied only in hippocampal slices and in hippocampal neuronal cultures. Δ9-THC inhibited glutamatergic synaptic transmission in some
studies (Hoffman et al. 2010; Roloff and Thayer 2009; Shen and Thayer 1999). Remarkably, Δ 9THC was found to be only a partial agonist, capable of antagonizing the effects of full agonists,
like WIN 55,212-2 or 2-AG (Kelley and Thayer 2004; Roloff and Thayer 2009). 2-AG-mediated
retrograde synaptic transmission was also antagonized by Δ9-THC (Roloff and Thayer 2009).
In cultured mouse hippocampal neurons, Δ9-THC itself did not affect glutamatergic synaptic
transmission at all but did prevent inhibition by the synthetic agonist WIN 55,212-2 (Straiker and
Mackie 2005). In this latter study, Δ9-THC also prevented endocannabinoid-mediated retrograde
synaptic transmission. In an important study, the effects of Δ9-THC were analyzed on cultured
mouse hippocampal neurons transfected with the human CB1 receptor (hCB1) and its splice variants (hCB1a, hCB1b; Straiker et al. 2012). Δ9-THC did not affect glutamatergic synaptic transmission in neurons transfected with hCB1, hCB1a, or hCB1b.
The summary of these observations is that Δ9-THC can inhibit glutamatergic synaptic transmission. However, Δ9-THC is only a partial agonist, and so sometimes fails to activate the CB1
receptor (especially the human CB1 receptor). Due to its low intrinsic activity, Δ9-THC can act as
an antagonist. It is interesting in this respect that endocannabinoid-mediated synaptic plasticity
processes can be antagonized by this phytocannabinoid, also in humans.
GABAergic synaptic transmission was inhibited by Δ9-THC in mouse hippocampal slices
(Laaris et al. 2010). The inhibition was presynaptic in nature, and Δ9-THC behaved as a full agonist, producing an inhibition as strong as that produced by the synthetic agonist WIN 55,212-2.
As already indicated, Δ9-THC appears to behave as a full CB1 receptor agonist at GABAergic
synapses but only as a partial CB1 agonist at glutamatergic synapses. A similar difference between
the efficacy or potency of Δ9-THC was also observed in the case of synthetic CB1 receptor agonists (Ohno-Shosaku et al. 2002). This difference is most probably due to the difference in the
number of CB1 receptors in the axon terminals: their density is high in the GABAergic terminals
and much lower in the glutamatergic axon terminals.
8.5.1.2 Effects of Δ9-THC in the peripheral nervous system

Neurotransmission between sympathetic or parasympathetic axons and innervated tissues has
been most often studied by measuring electrically evoked contractions of the target tissues (Table
8.2). When Δ9-THC inhibited neurotransmission, it was always shown that this inhibition was
due to presynaptic inhibition. In a few cases, electrically evoked release of [3H]norepinephrine
was determined. When inhibition of neurotransmission by Δ9-THC was observed, the involvement of CB1 receptors was verified in most cases.

Species

Rat

Rat

Rat

Rat/mouse

Mouse

Mouse; expression of
human cb1 receptors
(hcb1, cb1a, hcb1b)

Neurotransmitter

Glutamate

Glutamate

Glutamate

Glutamate

Glutamate

Glutamate

Hippocampus
(cell culture)

Hippocampus
(cell culture)

Hippocampus
(brain slice)

Hippocampus
(cell culture)

Hippocampus
(cell culture)

Hippocampus
(cell culture)

Region

Electrophysiology
(patch clamp);
autaptic EPSCs

Electrophysiology
(patch clamp);
autaptic EPSCs

Electrophysiology
(patch clamp)

Electrophysiology
(patch clamp)

Microfluorometry
(Ca2+ spikes
analyzed)

Electrophysiology
(patch clamp);
microfluorometry
(Ca2+ spikes
analyzed)

Method
Δ9-THC inhibits

Δ9-THC

Δ9-THC blocks
the inhibition of
transmission by 2-AG
Δ9-THC inhibits EPSCs;
Δ9-THC blocks the
inhibition of EPSCs
by WIN 55,212-2;Δ9THC occludes DSE
Δ9-THC inhibits fEPSPs/
EPSCs (the degree
of inhibition depends
on the level of activation
of A1 adenosine receptors)
Δ9-THC does not inhibit
EPSCs;Δ9-THC blocks
the inhibition of EPSCs
by WIN 55,212-2;Δ9THC blocks DSE
Δ9-THC does not affect
EPSCs

Δ9-THC

Δ9-THC

Δ9-THC

Δ9-THC

Δ9-THC

transmission;Δ9-THC
is a partial agonist

Effect

Phytocannabinoid

Table 8.1 Effects of phytocannabinoids on synaptic transmission in the central nervous system

Straiker et al.
2012

Straiker and
Mackie 2005

Hoffman et al.
2010

Roloff and
Thayer 2009

Kelley and
Thayer 2004

Shen and
Thayer 1999

Reference

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON NEUROTRANSMISSION

163

Rat

Rat/mouse

Mouse

Mouse

Glutamate

Glutamate

GABA

GABA

Cerebellum
(brain slice)

Hippocampus
(brain slice)

Hippocampus
(brain slice)

Hippocampus
(cell culture,
brain slice)

Region

Electrophysiology
(patch clamp)

Electrophysiology
(patch clamp)

Electrophysiology
(patch-clamp);
microfluorometry

Electrophysiology
(patch clamp,
fEPSPs)

Method

Cannabidiol antagonizes
the GPR55-mediated
effects of LPI and O-1602
(increase in mEPSC
frequency and presynaptic
axon terminal calcium
concentration)
Δ9-THC inhibits IPSCs;
Δ9-THC is a full agonist
Δ9-THCV increases mIPSC
frequency

Δ9-THC
Δ9-THCV

Cannabidiol lowers the
frequency of synaptically
driven action
potentials.Cannabidiol
inhibits fEPSPs; CB1
receptors and 5-HT1A
receptors are involved
in these effects

Effect

Cannabidiol

Cannabidiol

Phytocannabinoid

Ma et al. 2008

Laaris et al.
2010

Sylantyev et al.
2013

Ledgerwood
et al. 2011

Reference

Abbreviations: 2-AG, 2-arachidonoylglycerol; Δ9-THC, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol; Δ9-THCV, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabivarin; EPSCs, excitatory postsynaptic currents; DSE, depolarizationinduced suppression of excitation; fEPSPs, extracellular field excitatory postsynaptic potentials; GABA, gamma-aminobutyric acid; IPSCs, inhibitory postsynaptic currents; mIPSCs, miniature
inhibitory postsynaptic currents.

Species

Neurotransmitter

Table 8.1 (continued) Effects of phytocannabinoids on synaptic transmission in the central nervous system

164
PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Rat

Rat

Mouse

Mouse

Mouse

Rat

Guinea pig

Rat

Mouse

Mouse

Mouse

Norepinephrine

Norepinephrine, ATP

Norepinephrine, ATP

Norepinephrine, ATP

Acetylcholine, ATP

Acetylcholine

Acetylcholine

CGRP

Norepinephrine, ATP

Norepinephrine, ATP

Norepinephrine, ATP

Vas deferens

Vas deferens

Vas deferens

Mesenteric
artery

Ileum

Ileum

Urinary bladder

Vas deferens

Vas deferens

Vas deferens

Vas deferens,
heart atrium

Tissue
Electrically evoked [3H]

Δ9-THC

Electrically evoked
contraction
Electrically evoked
contraction
Electrically evoked
relaxation

Δ9-THC
Δ9-THC
Δ9-THC

Cannabigerol

Electrically evoked
contraction

Electrically evoked
contraction

Electrically evoked
contraction

Δ9-THC

Δ9-THCV

Electrically evoked
contraction

Δ9-THC

Electrically evoked
contraction

Electrically evoked
contraction

Δ9-THC

Cannabidiol

Electrically evoked [3H]
norepinephrine release

Δ9-THC

norepinephrine release

Measured parameter

Phytocannabinoid

Inhibition of transmission
(mediated by α2-adrenoceptors)

Antagonism of CB1-mediated
inhibition of transmission

Antagonism of the effects
of WIN 55,212-2 and CP55940
(not CB1/CB2-mediated)

Inhibition of transmission
(not CB1/CB2-mediated)

Inhibition of transmission

Inhibition of transmission

Inhibition of transmission

Inhibition of transmission

Inhibition of transmission

Inhibition of transmission

Inhibition of transmission

Effect

Abbreviations: CGRP, calcitonin gene-related peptide; Δ9-THC, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol; Δ9-THCV, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabivarin.

Species

Neurotransmitter

Table 8.2 Effects of phytocannabinoids on neuroeffector transmission in the peripheral nervous system

Cascio et al. 2010

Thomas et al. 2005;
Pertwee et al. 2007

Pertwee et al. 1992b

Duncan et al. 2004

Pertwee et al.
1992a, 1996

Makwana et al.
2010

Pertwee and
Fernando 1996

Lay et al. 2000

Pertwee et al.
1992a, 1993, 1995

Graham et al. 1974

Ishac et al. 1996

Reference

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON NEUROTRANSMISSION

165

166

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Δ9-THC inhibited sympathetic neuroeffector transmission in the rat heart and vas deferens
(Ishac et al. 1996). It was shown in many studies that Δ9-THC inhibits contractions of the mouse
vas deferens elicited by electrical stimulation of sympathetic axons (e.g., Pertwee et al. 1992a; 1995).
Remarkably, in one study, Δ9-THC did not affect responses elicited by sympathetic stimulation of
the mouse heart atrium, rat heart atrium, rat mesenteric artery, or rat vas deferens (Lay et al. 2000).
Cholinergic neuroeffector transmission was inhibited by Δ9-THC in the mouse urinary bladder
and in the rat and guinea pig ileum (Makwana et al. 2010; Pertwee and Fernando 1996; Pertwee
et al. 1992a, 1996).
Δ9-THC suppressed the calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)-mediated relaxation of mesenteric arteries elicited by electrical stimulation of sensory mesenteric axons (Duncan et al. 2004).
However, this suppression was not prevented by CB1 or CB2 antagonists.
8.5.2 Effects of cannabidiol, Δ9-THCV, and cannabigerol
8.5.2.1 Cannabidiol

In a recent study, Ledgerwood et al. (2011) showed that cannabidiol inhibits synaptic transmission between cultured hippocampal neurons and glutamatergic synaptic transmission in hippocampal slices. The inhibition was attenuated by CB1 antagonists and was presynaptic in nature.
These findings are remarkable in the light of observations that cannabidiol has only low affinity
for CB1 receptors in some studies (Thomas et al. 1998; Showalter et al. 1996) or behaves as a CB1
antagonist in other studies (Thomas et al. 2004, 2007).
In the mouse vas deferens, cannabidiol antagonized suppression of the electrically evoked twitch
response by the synthetic cannabinoids WIN 55,212-2 and CP-55940 (Pertwee et al. 1992b). CB1
and CB2 receptors were, however, not involved in this antagonism.
In 2007, Ryberg et al. reported that many cannabinoids possess affinity for GPR55. In that study it
was also shown that cannabidiol is an antagonist at GPR55: it prevented G protein activation elicited
by GPR55 agonists. In a more recent study it was shown that exogenous GPR55 agonists (O-1602 and
lysophosphatidyl inositol) and an unidentified endogenous GPR55 agonist each enhance transmitter
release from glutamatergic axons in rat hippocampal slices (Sylantyev et al. 2013). Cannabidiol acted
as an antagonist of the synaptic stimulation elicited by the exogenous and the endogenous agonists.
8.5.2.2 Δ9-THCV

In mouse cerebellar cortical brain slices Δ9-THCV antagonized the inhibition of GABAergic synaptic transmission between interneurons and Purkinje cells elicited by the synthetic cannabinoid
receptor agonist WIN 55,212-2 (Ma et al. 2008). Interestingly, Δ9-THCV alone enhanced synaptic
transmission between the interneurons and Purkinje cells (Ma et al. 2008): this may have been
due either to antagonism of the effect of an endogenous cannabinoid or to inverse agonistic action
at constitutively active CB1 receptors. Although not yet shown, it is expected that Δ9-THCV will
share the ability of synthetic CB1 receptor antagonists to prevent endocannabinoid-mediated retrograde signaling in the brain (see Fig. 8.2).
In the mouse vas deferens, synthetic cannabinoids and endocannabinoids inhibited the twitch
response elicited by stimulation of sympathetic axons (Pertwee et al. 2007; Thomas et al. 2005).
Δ9-THCV prevented this inhibition by acting as a competitive CB1 antagonist.
8.5.2.3 Cannabigerol

The phytocannabinoid cannabigerol inhibited electrically evoked twitch responses in the mouse
vas deferens (Cascio et al. 2010). Surprisingly, this inhibition was antagonized by yohimbine,
pointing to an involvement of α2-adrenoceptors.

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON NEUROTRANSMISSION

8.6 Conclusions and future directions
By acting on CB1 receptors, the main psychoactive phytocannabinoid, Δ9-THC, inhibits glutamatergic and GABAergic synaptic transmission in the hippocampus and neuroeffector transmission mediated by norepinephrine, acetylcholine, and ATP in a series of peripheral tissues. The
basis of this inhibition is inhibition of transmitter release from the presynaptic axon terminals. In
some of the studies Δ9-THC appeared to be a partial agonist.
Remarkably, the effects of Δ9-THC have been studied only in the hippocampus and in peripheral tissues of animals: no observations on human tissues exist. Future research should demonstrate the effect of Δ9-THC in additional central nervous system regions and, more importantly,
in human central nervous and peripheral tissues.
Interference of Δ9-THC with endocannabinoid-mediated retrograde signaling should be systemically studied: it is hypothesized that due to its low intrinsic activity, Δ9-THC will attenuate
retrograde signaling in many tissues and brain regions.
In future studies it should be clarified how Δ9-THCV interferes with the function of CB1 receptors in situ in tissues: Does it inhibit endocannabinoid-mediated retrograde signaling? Does it
suppress constitutively active presynaptic receptors?
Phytocannabinoids possess affinity not only for CB 1 and CB2 receptors, but also for many
other receptors, ion channels, transporters, and enzymes. For example, at submicromolar
concentrations, Δ9-THC has affinity for GPR55, 5- hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)-3A receptors,
transient receptor potential (TRP)-A1 receptors, TRPV2 receptors, adenosine transporters,
monoamine transporters, and phospholipases (Pertwee and Cascio, Chapter 6, this volume).
Likewise, Δ9-THCV possesses affinity in the submicromolar range also for TRPM8 receptors
(Pertwee and Cascio, Chapter 6, this volume). In this same concentration range, cannabidiol
can target, in addition to CB1 and CB2 receptors, GPR55, 5-HT1A-receptors, 5-HT3A-receptors,
TRPA1 receptors, TRPM8 receptors, TRPV4 receptors, and the CYP1A1 microsomal enzyme
(Cascio and Pertwee, Chapter 7, this volume). No information is available on how these nonCB1- and non-CB2-mediated effects of the phytocannabinoids contribute to their effects on
synaptic transmission. Research in the future should eliminate this deficit in knowledge.

References
Atwood, B.K., Straiker, A., and Mackie, K. (2012). CB2 cannabinoid receptors inhibit synaptic transmission when expressed in cultured autaptic neurons. Neuropharmacology, 63, 514–523.
Bacci, A., Huguenard, J.R., and Prince D.A. (2004). Long-lasting self-inhibition of neocortical interneurons mediated by endocannabinoids. Nature, 431, 312–316.
Bayewitch, M., Rhee, M.-H., Avidor-Reiss, T., Breuer, A., Mechoulam, R., and Vogel, Z. (1996). (-)-Δ9Tetrahydrocannabinol antagonizes the peripheral cannabinoid receptor-mediated inhibition of adenylyl
cyclase. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 271, 9902–9905.
Blackmer, T., Larsen, E.C., Bartleson, C., et al. (2005). G protein βγ directly regulates SNARE protein
fusion machinery for secretory granule exocytosis. Nature Neuroscience, 8, 412–425.
Bolognini, D., Costa, B., Maione, S., et al. (2010). The plant cannabinoid Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin can
decrease signs of inflammation and inflammatory pain in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 160,
677–687.
Breivogel, C.S., Walker, M.J., Huang, S.M., Roy, M.B., and Childers, S.R. (2004). Cannabinoid signaling
in rat cerebellar granule cells: G-protein activation, inhibition of glutamate release and endogenous cannabinoids. Neuropharmacology, 47, 81–91.
Brown, S.P., Safo, P.K., and Regehr, W.G. (2004). Endocannabinoids inhibit transmission at granule
cell to Purkinje cell synapses by modulating three types of presynaptic calcium channels. Journal of
Neuroscience, 24, 5623–5631.

167

168

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Brusco, A., Tagliaferro, P., Saez, T., and Onaivi, E.S. (2008). Postsynaptic localization of CB2 cannabinoid
receptors in the rat hippocampus. Synapse, 62, 944–949.
Calignano, A., Katona, I., Desarnaud, F., et al. (2000). Bidirectional control of airway responsiveness by
endogenous cannabinoids. Nature, 408, 96–101.
Cascio, M.G., Gauson, L.A., Stevenson, L.A., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2010). Evidence that the plant
cannabinoid cannabigerol is a highly potent α2-adrenoceptor agonist and moderately potent 5HT1A
receptor antagonist. British Journal of Pharmacology, 159, 129–141.
Castillo, P.E., Younts, T.J., Chavez, A.E., and Hashimotodani, Y. (2012). Endocannabinoid signaling and
synaptic function. Neuron, 76, 70–81.
Cota, D., Marsicano, G., Tschop, M., et al. (2003). The endogenous cannabinoid system affects energy
balance via central orexigenic drive and peripheral lipogenesis. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 112,
423–431.
Cristino, L., De Petrocellis, L., Pryce, G., Baker, D., Guglielmotti, V., and Di Marzo, V. (2006).
Immunohistochemical localization of cannabinoid type 1 and vanilloid transient receptor potential
vanilloid type 1 receptors in the mouse brain. Neuroscience, 139, 1405–1415.
Daniel, H., Rancillac, A., and Crepel, F. (2004). Mechanisms underlying cannabinoid inhibition of presynaptic Ca2+ influx at parallel fibre synapses of the rat cerebellum. Journal of Physiology (London), 557,
159–174.
Den Boon, F.S., Chameau, P., Schaafsma-Zhao, Q., et al. (2012). Excitability of prefrontal cortical pyramidal neurons is modulated by activation of intracellular type-2 cannabinoid receptors. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109, 3534–3539.
Dove Pettit, D.A., Harrison, M.P., Olson, J.M., Spencer, R.F., and Cabral, G.A. (1998).
Immunohistochemical localization of the neural cannabinoid receptor in rat brain. Journal of
Neuroscience Research, 51, 391–402.
Duncan, M., Kendall, D.A., and Ralevic, V. (2004). Characterization of cannabinoid modulation of
sensory neurotransmission in the rat isolated mesenteric arterial bed. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 311, 411–419.
Egertova, M., Cravatt, B.F., and Elphick, M.R. (2003). Comparative analysis of fatty acid amide hydrolase
and CB1 cannabinoid receptor expression in the mouse brain: evidence of a widespread role for fatty
acid amide hydrolase in regulation of endocannabinoid signaling. Neuroscience, 119, 481–496.
Engler, B., Freiman, I., Urbanski, M., and Szabo, B. (2006). Effects of exogenous and endogenous cannabinoids on GABAergic neurotransmission between the caudate-putamen and the globus pallidus in the
mouse. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 316, 608–617.
Freiman, I., Anton, A., Monyer, H., Urbanski, M.J. and Szabo, B. (2006). Analysis of the effects of cannabinoids on identified synaptic connections in the caudate-putamen by paired recordings in transgenic
mice. Journal of Physiology (London), 575, 789–806.
Freiman, I. and Szabo, B. (2005). Cannabinoids depress excitatory neurotransmission between the subthalamic nucleus and the globus pallidus. Neuroscience, 133, 305–313.
Freund, T.F., Katona, I., and Piomelli, D. (2003). Role of endogenous cannabinoids in synaptic signaling.
Physiological Reviews, 83, 1017–1066.
Galiègue, S., Mary, S., Marchand, J., et al. (1995). Expression of central and peripheral cannabinoid receptors
in human immune tissues and leukocyte subpopulations. European Journal of Biochemistry, 232, 54–61.
Gerard, C.M., Mollereau, C., Vassart, G., and Parmentier, M. (1991). Molecular cloning of a human cannabinoid receptor which is also expressed in testis. Biochemical Journal, 279, 129–134.
Gong, J.-P., Onaivi, E.S., Ishiguro, H., et al. (2006). Cannabinoid CB2 receptors: immunohistochemical
localization in rat brain. Brain Research 1071, 10–23.
Graham, J.D.P., Lewis, M.J., and Li, D.M.F. (1974). The effect of delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol on
the release of [3H]-(-)-noradrenaline from the isolated vas deferens of the rat. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 52, 223–236.

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON NEUROTRANSMISSION

Heifets, B.D. and Castillo, P.E. (2009). Endocannabinoid signaling and long-term synaptic plasticity.
Annual Review of Physiology, 71, 283–306.
Herkenham, M., Lynn, A.B., De Costa, B.R., and Richfield, E.K. (1991a). Neuronal localization of cannabinoid receptors in the basal ganglia of the rat. Brain Research, 547, 267–274.
Herkenham, M., Lynn, A.B., Johnson, R.M., Melvin, L.S., de Costa, B.R. and Rice, K.C. (1991b).
Characterization and localization of cannabinoid receptors in rat brain: a quantitative in vitro autoradiographic study. Journal of Neuroscience, 11, 563–583.
Hoffman, A.F., Laaris, N., Kawamura, M., Masino, S.A. and Lupica, C.R. (2010). Control of cannabinoid
CB1 receptor function on glutamate axon terminals by endogenous adenosine acting at A1 receptors.
Journal of Neuroscience, 30, 545–555.
Hohmann, A.G. and Herkenham, M. (1999). Cannabinoid receptors undergo axonal flow in sensory
nerves. Neuroscience, 92, 1171–1175.
Ishac, E.J.N., Jiang, L., Lake, K.D., Varga, K., Abood, M.E., and Kunos, G. (1996). Inhibition of exocytotic
noradrenaline release by presynaptic cannabinoid CB1 receptors on peripheral sympathetic nerves.
British Journal of Pharmacology, 118, 2023–2028.
Kano, M., Ohno-Shosaku, T., Hashimotodani, Y., Uchigashima, M., and Watanabe, M. (2009).
Endocannabinoid-mediated control of synaptic transmission. Physiological Reviews, 89, 309–380.
Katona, I., Sperlagh, B., Sik, A., et al. (1999). Presynaptically located CB1 cannabinoid receptors regulate
GABA release from axon terminals of specific hippocampal interneurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 19,
4544–4558.
Kelley, B.G. and Thayer, S.A. (2004). Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol antagonizes endocannabinoid modulation of synaptic transmission between hippocampal neurons in culture. Neuropharmacology, 46,
709–715.
Kovacs, F.E., Illes, P., and Szabo, B. (2011). Purinergic receptor-mediated endocannabinoid production and retrograde synaptic signaling in the cerebellar cortex. British Journal of Pharmacology, 162,
974–988.
Kushmerick, C., Price, G.D., Taschenberger, H., et al. (2004). Retroinhibition of presynaptic Ca2+ currents by endocannabinoids released via postsynaptic mGluR activation at a calyx synapse. Journal of
Neuroscience, 24, 5955–5965.
Laaris, N., Good, C.H., and Lupica, C.R. (2010). Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol is a full agonist at CB1 receptors
on GABA neuron axon terminals in the hippocampus. Neuropharmacology, 59, 121–127.
Lanciego, J.L., Barroso-Chinea, P., Rico, A.J., et al. (2011). Expression of the mRNA coding the cannabinoid receptor 2 in the pallidal complex of Macaca fascicularis. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 25,
97–104.
Lay, L., Angus, J.A., and Wright, C.E. (2000). Pharmacological characterization of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in the rat and mouse. European Journal of Pharmacology, 391, 151–161.
Ledgerwood, C.J., Greenwood, S.M., Brett, R.R., Pratt, J.A., and Bushell, T.J. (2011). Cannabidiol inhibits
synaptic transmission in rat hippocampal cultures and slices via multiple receptor pathways. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 162, 286–294.
Leterrier, C., Laine, J., Darmon, M., Boudin, H., Rossier, J., and Lenkei, Z. (2006). Constitutive activation
drives compartment-selective endocytosis and axonal targeting of type 1 cannabinoid receptors. Journal
of Neuroscience, 26, 3141–3153.
Lovinger, D.M. (2008). Presynaptic modulation by endocannabinoids. Handbook of Experimental
Pharmacology, 184, 435–477.
Ma, Y.-L., Weston, S., Whalley, B., and Stephens, G. (2008). The phytocannabinoid Δ9tetrahydrocannabivarin modulates inhibitory neurotransmission in the cerebellum. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 154, 204–215.
Mackie, K. (2005). Distribution of cannabinoid receptors in the central and peripheral nervous system.
Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, 168, 299–325.

169

170

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Makwana, R., Molleman, A., and Parsons, M.E. (2010). Evidence for both inverse agonism at the cannabinoid CB1 receptor and the lack of an endogenous cannabinoid tone in the rat and guinea-pig isolated
ileum myenteric plexus-longitudinal muscle preparation. British Journal of Pharmacology, 160, 615–626.
Matsuda, L.A., Bonner, T.I., and Lolait, S.J. (1993). Localization of cannabinoid receptor mRNA in rat
brain. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 327, 535–550.
Mukhopadhyay, P., Batkai, S., Rajesh, M., et al. (2007). Pharmacological inhibition of CB1 cannabinoid receptor protects against doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Journal of the American College of
Cardiologists, 50, 528–536.
Munro, S., Thomas, K.L., and Abu-Shaar, M. (1993). Molecular characterization of a peripheral receptor
for cannabinoids. Nature, 365, 61–65.
Nakatsuka, T., Chen, H.-X., Roper, S.N., and Gu, J.G. (2003). Cannabinoid receptor-1 activation suppresses inhibitory synaptic activity in human dentate gyrus. Neuropharmacology, 45, 116–121.
Nyiri, G., Cserep, C., Szabadits, E., Mackie, K., and Freund, T.F. (2005). CB1 cannabinoid receptors are
enriched in the perisynaptic annulus and on preterminal segments of hippocampal GABAergic axons.
Neuroscience, 136, 811–822.
Ohno-Shosaku, T., Tsubokawa, H., Mizushima, I., Yoneda, N., Zimmer, A., and Kano, M. (2002).
Presynaptic cannabinoid sensitivity is a major determinant of depolarization-induced retrograde suppression at hippocampal synapses. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 3864–3872.
Pazos, M.R., Tolon, R.M., Benito, C., et al. (2008). Cannabinoid CB1 receptors are expressed by parietal
cells of the human gastric mucosa. Journal of Histochemistry and Cytochemistry, 56, 511–516.
Pertwee, R.G. and Fernando, S.R. (1996). Evidence for the presence of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in
mouse urinary bladder. British Journal of Pharmacology, 118, 2053–2058.
Pertwee, R.G., Fernando, S.R., Nash, J.E., and Coutts, A.A. (1996). Further evidence for the presence
of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in guinea-pig small intestine. British Journal of Pharmacology, 118,
2199–2205.
Pertwee, R., Griffin, G., Fernando, S., Li, X., Hill, A., and Makriyannis, A. (1995). AM630, a competitive
cannabinoid receptor antagonist. Life Sciences, 56, 1949–1955.
Pertwee, R.G., Ross, R.A., Craib, S.J., and Thomas, A. (2002). (-)-Cannabidiol antagonizes cannabinoid
receptor agonists and noradrenaline in the mouse vas deferens. European Journal of Pharmacology, 456,
99–106.
Pertwee, R.G., Stevenson, L.A., Elrick, D.B., Mechoulam, R., and Corbett, A.D. (1992a). Inhibitory effects
of certain enantiomeric cannabinoids in the mouse vas deferens and the myenteric plexus preparation
of guinea-pig small intestine. British Journal of Pharmacology, 105, 980–984.
Pertwee, R.G., Stevenson, L.A., and Griffin, G. (1993). Cross-tolerance between delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and the cannabimimetic agents, CP 55,940, WIN 55,212-2 and anandamide. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 110, 1483–1490.
Pertwee, R.G., Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A., et al. (2007). The psychoactive plant cannabinoid, Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol, is antagonized by Δ8- and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin in mice in vivo. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 586–594.
Rhee, M.-H., Vogel, Z., Barg, J., et al. (1997). Cannabinol derivatives: binding to cannabinoid receptors
and inhibition of adenylylcyclase. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 40, 3228–3233.
Roloff, A.M. and Thayer, S.A. (2009). Modulation of excitatory synaptic transmission by Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol switches from agonist to antagonist depending on firing rate. Molecular
Pharmacology, 75, 892–900.
Ryberg, E., Larsson, N., Sjögren, S., et al. (2007). The orphan receptor GPR55 is a novel cannabinoid
receptor. British Journal of Pharmacology, 152, 1092–1101.
Shen, M. and Thayer, S.A. (1998). Cannabinoid receptor agonists protect cultured rat hippocampal neurons from excitotoxicity. Molecular Pharmacology, 54, 459–462.

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON NEUROTRANSMISSION

Shen, M. and Thayer, S.A. (1999). Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol acts as a partial agonist to modulate glutamatergic synaptic transmission between rat hippocampal neurons in culture. Molecular Pharmacology,
55, 8–13.
Shire, D., Carillon, C., Kaghad, M., et al. (1995). An amino-terminal variant of the central cannabinoid
receptor resulting from alternative splicing. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 270, 3726–3731.
Showalter, V.M., Compton, D.R., Martin, B.R., and Abood, M.E. (1996). Evaluation of binding in a transfected cell line expressing a peripheral cannabinoid receptor (CB2): Identification of cannabinoid receptor subtype selective ligands. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 278, 989–999.
Sibaev, A., Yüce, B., Kemmer, M., et al. (2009). Cannabinoid-1 (CB1) receptors regulate colonic propulsion
by acting at motor neurons within the ascending motor pathways in mouse colon. American Journal of
Physiology, Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 296, G119–G128.
Sim, L.J., Hampson, R.E., Deadwyler, S.A., and Childers, S.R. (1996). Effects of chronic treatment with
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on cannabinoid-stimulated [35S]GTP-gamma-S autoradiography in rat
brain. Journal of Neuroscience, 16, 8057–8066.
Skaper, S.D., Buriani, A., Dal Toso, R., et al. (1996). The ALIAmide palmitoylethanolamide and cannabinoids, but not anandamide, are protective in a delayed postglutamate paradigm of excitotoxic death
of cerebellar granule neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 93, 3984–3989.
Ständer, S., Schmelz, M., Metze, D., Luger, T., and Rukwied, R. (2005). Distribution of cannabinoid
receptor 1 (CB1) and 2 (CB2) on sensory nerve fibers and adnexal structures in human skin. Journal of
Dermatological Sciences, 38, 177–188.
Straiker A. and Mackie K. (2005). Depolarization-induced suppression of excitation in murine autaptic
hippocampal neurones. Journal of Physiology (London), 569, 501–517.
Straiker, A., Wager-Miller, J., Hutchens, J., and Mackie, K. (2012). Differential signalling in human cannabinoid CB1 receptors and their splice variants in autaptic hippocampal neurones. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 165, 2660–2671.
Suarez, J., Bermudez-Silva, F., Mackie, K., et al. (2008). Immunohistochemical description of the endogenous cannabinoid system in the rat cerebellum and functionally related nuclei. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 509, 400–421.
Szabo, B. and Schlicker, E. (2005). Effects of cannabinoids on neurotransmission. Handbook of
Experimental Pharmacology, 168, 327–365.
Szabo, B., Than, M., Thorn, D., and Wallmichrath, I. (2004). Analysis of the effects of cannabinoids on
synaptic transmission between basket and Purkinje cells in the cerebellar cortex of the rat. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 310, 915–925.
Szabo, B., Urbanski, M.J., Bisogno, T., et al. (2006). Depolarization-induced retrograde synaptic inhibition in the cerebellar cortex is mediated by 2-arachidonoylglycerol. Journal of Physiology (London), 577,
263–280.
Sylantyev, S., Jensena, T.P., Ross, R.A., and Rusakova, D.A. (2013). Cannabinoid- and lysophosphatidylinositolsensitive receptor GPR55 boosts neurotransmitter release at central synapses. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110, 5193–5198.
Tanimura, A., Yamazaki, M., Hashimotodani, Y., et al. (2010). The endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol
produced by diacylglycerol lipase α mediates retrograde suppression of synaptic transmission. Neuron, 65,
320–327.
Teixeira-Clerc, F., Julien, B., Grenard, P., et al. (2006). CB1 cannabinoid receptor antagonism: a new strategy for the treatment of liver fibrosis. Nature Medicine, 12, 671–675.
Thomas, A., Baillie, G.L., Phillips, A.M., Razdan, R.K., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2007). Cannabidiol
displays unexpectedly high potency as an antagonist of CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists in vitro. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 613–623.

171

172

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Thomas, A., Ross, R.A., Saha, B., Mahadevan, A., Razdan, R.K. and Pertwee, R.G. (2004). 6"-Azidohex2"-yne-cannabidiol: a potential neutral, competitive cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist. European
Journal of Pharmacology, 487, 213–221.
Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A. and Wease, K.N., et al. (2005). Evidence that the plant cannabinoid
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin is a cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptor antagonist. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 146, 917–926.
Thomas, B.F., Gilliam, A.F., Burch, D.F., Roch, e M.J., and Seltzman, H.H. (1998). Comparative receptor
binding analyses of cannabinoid agonists and antagonists. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, 285, 285–292.
Tsou, K., Brown, S., Sanudo-Pena, M.C., Mackie, K., and Walker, J.M. (1998). Immunohistochemical distribution of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in the rat central nervous system. Neuroscience, 83, 393–411.
Van Laere, K., Goffin, K., Casteels, C., et al. (2008). Gender-dependent increases with healthy aging of
the human cerebral cannabinoid-type 1 receptor binding using [18F]MK-9470 PET. Neuroimage, 39,
1533–1541.
Van Sickle, M.D., Duncan, M., and Kingsley, P.J., et al. (2005). Identification and functional characterization of brainstem cannabinoid CB2 receptors. Science, 310, 329–332.
Westlake, T.M., Howlett, A.C., Bonner, T.I., Matsuda, L.A., and Herkenham, M. (1994). Cannabinoid
receptor binding and messenger RNA expression in human brain: an in vitro receptor autoradiography
and in situ hybridization histochemistry study of normal aged and Alzheimer's brains. Neuroscience, 63,
637–652.
Wotherspoon, G., Fox, A., McIntyre, P., Colley, S., Bevan, S., and Winter J. (2005). Peripheral nerve
injury induces cannabinoid receptor 2 protein expression in rat sensory neurons. Neuroscience, 135,
235–245.
Xi, Z.-X., Peng, X.-Q., Li, X., et al. (2011). Brain cannabinoid CB2 receptors modulate cocaine´s actions in
mice. Nature Neuroscience, 14, 1160–1166.
Yoshida, T., Fukaya, M., Uchigashima, M., et al. (2006). Localization of diacylglycerol lipase-a around postsynaptic spine suggests close proximity between production site of an endocannabinoid, 2-arachidonoylglycerol, and presynaptic cannabinoid CB1 receptor. Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 4740–4751.

Chapter 9

Cannabinoids and Addiction
Eliot L. Gardner

9.1 Brain mechanisms and substrates of addiction
Over the past 60 years, many of the brain substrates, circuits, and mechanisms underlying addiction have been elucidated (Gardner 1999, 2000, 2005, 2011; Gardner and David 1999; Gardner
and Wise 2009; O’Brien and Gardner 2005).
It is now well accepted that abusable drugs derive their addictive potential from activating the
core pleasure/reward circuitry of the brain (Gardner 2005, 2011). That circuitry originates in
the anterior bed nuclei of the medial forebrain bundle (MFB), descends caudally in a myelinated
moderately fast-conducting pathway (of unknown neurotransmitter type) within the MFB to synapse on dopamine (DA) neurons within the ventral tegmental area (VTA) of the limbic midbrain.
Axons from those VTA DA cell bodies ascend rostrally within the medial forebrain bundle to
synapse within the nucleus accumbens (NAc) of the limbic forebrain. Collateral reward-encoding
DA axons also ascend rostrally to innervate the olfactory tubercle and frontal cortex. From the
NAc, additional reward-encoding neurons—using gamma-aminobutyric acid and endogenous
opiate peptides as their neurotransmitter—project to the ventral pallidum (VP). Although this
MFB–VTA–MFB–NAc–VP system is commonly spoken of as encoding reward, it is in truth very
much more functionally complex and heterogeneous. This system also encodes degree of reward,
reward anticipation, disconfirmation of reward expectancy, reward prediction error (e.g., Chang
et al. 1994; Lee 1999; Peoples and Cavanaugh 2003; Peoples et al. 1999; Schulz 1994; Schulz et al.
1992, 1993) and very likely additional reward-related neural computations.
Given the centrality of drug-induced reward enhancement to the disease of addiction, a number
of workers have postulated that—to a degree—addiction results from a basal reward-­deficiency
state which addictive drugs counteract, giving them much of their powerful motivational properties (e.g., Blum et al. 1996; Comings and Blum 2000; Gardner 1999; Koob 2013).
As the disease of addiction develops, drug-seeking and drug-taking become progressively less
driven by drug-induced reward and drug-induced positive hedonic states, and progressively more
driven by negative reinforcement. Such negative reinforcement can be based upon concurrent
“opponent process” hedonic and motivational mechanisms (Gardner 2011; Koob and Wee 2010;
Nazzaro et al. 1981) or upon rebound withdrawal dysphoria (Der-Avakian and Markou 2012;
Epping-Jordan et al. 1998; Kenny et al. 2003; Kokkinidis and McCarter 1990; Koob 2009a, 2009b;
Koob and Le Moal 2008) or both. The drug user then comes to use addictive drugs not to get
“high” but rather to get “straight” (i.e., to push his/her chronically depressed subjective hedonic
state back toward normal). Another neurobiological change occurs during the progression of the
addictive process—drug-seeking and drug-taking behavior become less reward driven and more
habit driven (Robbins and Everitt 2002), although “chasing the remembered ‘high’” remains a
powerful motivation (O’Brien and Gardner 2005). This progression from reward-driven drugtaking to habit-driven drug-taking corresponds to a progressive change in locus of control over

174

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

behavior from the reward-encoding ventral striatal domains of the NAc to the habit-mediating
neural circuitry of the dorsal neostriatum (Haber et al. 2000; Robbins and Everitt 2002).
Even in drug addicts or alcoholics who have succeeded in achieving long-term sobriety
and abstinence, the control over such sobriety and abstinence often remains extremely fragile
(Hubbard et al. 2003; Milkman et al. 1983–84; Milton and Everitt 2012). This fragility can last
for decades, is associated with significant relapse to drug-seeking and drug-taking behavior,
and is associated with increased mortality (Woody et al. 2007). It has been long understood,
since the pioneering work done by Alcoholics Anonymous in the 1930s, that there are three
principal triggers to relapse—re-exposure to addictive drug (and it needn’t be the drug that
the addict was formerly addicted to; so-called “cross-triggering” from one addictive drug to
another is well-described), stress, and re-exposure to the environmental cues (sights, sounds,
smells) that were previously associated with drinking or drugging. Using animals models of
relapse to drug-seeking and drug-taking behavior (e.g., Cooper et al. 2007; Crombag et al. 2008;
Epstein et al. 2006; Shaham et al. 2002), a great deal has been learned recently about the neural circuits, substrates, and mechanisms underlying relapse to drug-seeking and drug-taking
behaviors (e.g., Bossert et al. 2005; Lê and Shaham 2002; Shalev et al. 2002; Vorel et al. 2001).
Drug-triggered relapse appears to be mediated by the rostrally projecting mesolimbic DA fiber
bundle within the MFB—which sends axonal projections not only to the NAc but also to the
olfactory tubercle, amygdala, and frontal cortex. Stress-triggered relapse appears to involve two
distinctly separate brain substrates. One is a neural circuit that arises in the central nucleus of
the amygdala and projects axonal terminals into the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis; this
system uses corticotrophin-releasing factor as its neurotransmitter. The other is a neural circuit
that arises in lateral tegmental nucleus A2 in the brain stem and projects axonal terminals into
the hypothalamus, bed nucleus of stria terminalis, NAc, and amygdala; this system uses norepinephrine as its neurotransmitter. Relapse triggered by environmental cues appears to involve
two brain systems. One is a neural circuit that arises in the ventral subiculum of the hippocampus and projects axonal terminals into the VTA and thence secondarily to the NAc (Vorel et al.
2001). The other is a neural circuit that arises in the basolateral complex of the amygdala and
projects to the NAc (Hayes et al. 2003). Both systems appear to use glutamate as their primary
neurotransmitter.

9.2 Common features of addictive drugs
By reference to the Chemical Abstracts compound count of all known chemicals and all known
chemical congeners, it appears that approximately 30 million chemicals are known to the human
species. Approximately 100 of these have addictive potential (Gardner 2000, 2005, 2011). The
question arises—what do these 100 compounds have in common that distinguishes them from
the other 30 million? The answers are straightforward and instructive (Gardner 2000, 2005,
2011). First, addictive drugs activate the VTA–NAc DA neural axis that encodes reward and
pleasure. Second, addictive drugs elevate NAc DA. Third, addictive drugs enhance electrical
brain-stimulation reward (BSR) within the core VTA–NAc reward-encoding neural axis. Fourth,
addictive drugs inhibit BSR upon drug withdrawal (this is considered to be an electrophysiological measure of withdrawal dysphoria; see, e.g., Kokkinidis and McCarter 1990). Fifth, addictive
drugs produce conditioned place preferences (CPP). Sixth, addictive drugs are voluntarily (often
avidly) systemically self-administered. Seventh, addictive drugs are voluntarily self-administered
into the core VTA–NAc reward-encoding neural axis. Eighth, addictive drugs trigger relapse to
previously-extinguished drug-seeking behavior.

Cannabinoids and Addiction

9.3 Cannabis and psychoactive phytocannabinoids
The Cannabis sativa plant has been used by humans for thousands of years, for both recreational
and medicinal use (Maldonado et al. 2011). There appear to be over 100 compounds—termed
phytocannabinoids—in C. sativa, at least some of which are known to be pharmacologically active.
Among these are Δ
­ 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), Δ8-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol (CBD),
and cannabinol (Pertwee 2005). Other phytocannabinoid derivatives of the cannabis plant include
cannabichromene, cannabigerol, cannabicyclol, cannabitriol, cannabivarin, cannabidivarin,
­cannabinolic acid, and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin (Δ9-THCV) (Elsohly and Slade 2005; Mechoulam
et al. 1970; Turner et al. 1980). It is generally agreed that the principal psychoactive ­phytocannabinoid—
having agonist actions—is THC (Gaoni and Mechoulam 1964).

9.4 Addictive actions of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol
9.4.1 Phytocannabinoid agonists activate the VTA–NAc core reward

neural axis

THC, the principal psychoactive constituent of marijuana and hashish, neurophysiologically
activates the VTA–NAc core reward neural axis by enhancing VTA–NAc DA neuronal firing
(e.g., French 1997; French et al. 1997). Cannabinoid activation of VTA–NAc DA neuronal firing
appears to be mediated by action within the VTA. Single-neuron electrophysiological recording
studies have shown that THC enhances neuronal firing rates in the VTA, both in intact animals
(e.g., French et al. 1997; Gessa et al. 1998; Wu and French 2000) and in VTA-containing brain
slices (e.g., Cheer et al. 2000). Crucially, cannabinoid agonist-induced enhancement of VTA–
NAc DA neuronal firing is accompanied by increased DA neuronal burst-firing (e.g., Diana
et al. 1998; French et al. 1997). This is important because DA neuronal burst-firing dramatically augments terminal axonal DA release (e.g., Gonon 1988). Equally important is the fact that
cannabinoid agonist-enhanced DA neuronal firing is attenuated by cannabinoid receptor type
1 (CB1) ­antagonism—implicating an endocannabinoid underlying mechanism. The straightforward interpretation of such findings is that cannabinoid agonist-induced enhancement of the
VTA–NAc DA core reward- and addiction-related neural axis (which then produces enhanced
extracellular NAc DA—see section 9.4.2) results from cannabinoid agonist-induced enhancement
of DA neuronal firing and burst firing of VTA DA neurons. This action appears on the basis of
best present evidence to be indirect (although see section 9.4.7).
9.4.2 Phytocannabinoid agonists elevate NAc DA

THC elevates NAc DA (Chen et al. 1990; Tanda et al. 1997). This NAc DA elevation is calcium dependent and naloxone blockable (Chen et al. 1990; Tanda et al. 1997). Importantly, this
THC-induced NAc DA elevation is qualitatively indistinguishable from the NAc DA elevations
produced by opioids (e.g., DiChiara and Imperato 1988), amphetamine (e.g., Carboni et al. 1989),
cocaine (e.g., Carboni et al. 1989), ethanol (e.g., DiChiara and Imperato 1988), nicotine (DiChiara
and Imperato 1988), barbiturates (e.g., DiChara and Imperato 1986), or addictive dissociative
anesthetics such as phencyclidine (e.g., Carboni et al. 1989). These effects are tetrodotoxin
sensitive (indicating that the DA is neuronal) and blocked by endocannabinoid CB1 receptor
antagonism (indicating mediation of these effects via a CB1 receptor-linked neuronal cascade).
Importantly, local intracerebral microinjections or microperfusions of THC elevate extracellular
DA in the VTA–NAc reward-encoding neural axis, whether the THC is microinjected into the
VTA or NAc (Chen et al. 1993).

175

176

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

9.4.3 Phytocannabinoid agonists enhance electrical brain-stimulation

reward in the VTA–MFB–NAc reward-encoding neural axis

THC augments electrical BSR in the VTA–MFB–NAc reward-encoding neural axis (Lepore et al.
1996). It must be noted that this cannabinoid-enhancing effect on BSR is a left-shift in electrophysiological brain-reward functions, i.e., a reward-enhancing or euphorigenic effect. It should
also be noted that the BSR-enhancing effect of THC is qualitatively indistinguishable from the
BSR-enhancing effects of such addictive compounds as morphine (e.g., Tzschentke and Schmidt
2000), methamphetamine (Spiller et al. 2008), and cocaine (e.g., Tzschentke and Schmidt 2000).
9.4.4 Phytocannabinoid agonist withdrawal inhibits electrical brain-

stimulation reward in the VTA–MFB–NAc reward-encoding neural axis
Withdrawal from THC administration inhibits (depresses) BSR in the VTA–MFB–NAc rewardencoding neural axis (Gardner and Vorel 1998). This inhibiting effect on BSR produced by THC
withdrawal is a right-shift in electrophysiological brain-reward functions, i.e., a reward-inhibiting
or dysphorigenic effect. It should also be noted that the inhibiting effect on BSR produced by
THC withdrawal is qualitatively indistinguishable from the BSR-inhibiting effects produced by
withdrawal from virtually all addictive compounds—including cocaine (e.g., Kokkinidis and
McCarter 1990).
9.4.5 Phytocannabinoid agonists induce conditioned place preference

Conditioned place preference (CPP) is an animal behavioral paradigm that measures the ability of environmental contexts paired with addictive drug administration to evoke drug-seeking
behavior in the absence of drug (see Tzschentke 1998, 2007). Thus, it is an animal model of both
drug-induced reward and of incentive motivation to seek drug. It has therefore been commonly used as an animal model in addiction research (Gardner and Wise 2009). THC induces CPP
(Lepore et al. 1995; Valjent and Maldonado 2000), which is qualitatively indistinguishable from
the CPP produced by opioid agonists (e.g., Ashby et al. 2003), cocaine (e.g., Ashby et al. 2002), or
nicotine (e.g., Horan et al. 2001; Pak et al. 2006). Importantly, THC microinfusions directly into
the VTA–MFB–NAc reward-encoding neural axis also produce CPP (Zangen et al. 2006), and the
CPP produced by such cannabinoid agonist microinfusions into the VTA–MFB–NAc neural axis
is qualitatively indistinguishable from the CPP produced by VTA–MFB–NAc microinfusions of
such addictive psychostimulants as amphetamine or cocaine (e.g., Liao et al. 2000).
9.4.6 Phytocannabinoid agonists are self-administered in animal

models of drug-taking behavior

For many, the sine qua non of an addictive substance is whether or not it will sustain voluntary
self-administration in animal models (see, e.g., Gardner and Wise 2009). For many years, voluntary self-administration of THC in animal models was elusive. However, this elusiveness has
been definitively put to rest by the pioneering work of Goldberg and colleagues (e.g., Justinova
et al. 2003) who have successively achieved, and replicated under exacting experimental conditions, voluntary THC self-administration in laboratory animals. Importantly, such THC selfadministration is qualitatively indistinguishable from the intravenous self-administration that is
supported by other addictive substances, such as cocaine (e.g., Xi et al. 2004). Importantly and
compellingly too, THC is voluntarily micro-infused by laboratory animals into both the VTA
and NAc loci of the VTA–MFB–NAc reward-encoding neural axis of the mesolimbic midbrain

Cannabinoids and Addiction

and forebrain (Zangen et al. 2006). Equally importantly and compellingly, such voluntary cannabinoid agonist self-administration directly into the VTA–MFB–NAc neural axis is qualitatively
indistinguishable from the voluntary self-administration directly into the VTA–MFB–NAc neural
axis supported by other addictive substances such as cocaine (e.g., Carlezon et al. 1995).
Thus, THC does not qualitatively differ to any significant degree from other addictive compounds in its ability to meet the earlier-noted cardinal characteristics of drugs possessing addictive potential.
9.4.7 Brain sites of pro-addiction phytocannabinoid action

The pro-addictive actions of phytocannabinoid CB1 agonists have conventionally been viewed
as being mediated within the VTA (see sections 9.4.5 and 9.4.6). However, as long ago as 1993,
Chen and colleagues demonstrated (Chen et al. 1993) that THC activates brain substrates
of addictive drug action at both the level of the VTA (nucleus of origin of the VTA–MFB–
NAc DA addiction-related neural axis) and the level of the NAc (major terminal locus of the
VTA–MFB–NAc DA addiction-related neural axis). Specifically, local microinjections of THC
directly into the VTA enhance local VTA extracellular DA overflow while local microinjections of THC directly into the NAc enhance local NAc extracellular DA overflow, as measured
by in vivo brain microdialysis (Chen et al. 1993). This suggestion of dual sites of action for
cannabinoid-enhanced brain reward and reward-related behaviors has been more recently
confirmed. Cannabinoid agonist-induced reward is activated by THC microinjections into
either the VTA or NAc (Zangen et al. 2006).

9.5 Cannabis addiction at the human level
9.5.1 Cannabis self-administration at the human laboratory level

One of the major advances in addiction research in recent decades has been the emulation
of animal models of addiction (see section 9.4) in human beings under controlled laboratory situations. There is a high degree of consistency between the drugs that are abused by
humans and the drugs that nonhuman animals will self-administer, demonstrating that the
mechanisms mediating drug reinforcement are largely conserved across species (Balster 1991;
Brady et al. 1987; Lile and Nader 2003). However, many have argued that the leap from animal
models to the human clinical situation—while obviously having face validity—is too broad
to have adequate construct or predictive validity (e.g., Haney 2009). Therefore, cannabis selfadministration has been carried out with humans in controlled laboratory settings starting
several decades ago (e.g., Mendelson et al. 1976). Such studies have shown that marijuana is
reinforcing. Active marijuana is self-administered significantly more than placebo marijuana
(Chait and Zacny 1992; Haney et al. 1997; Mendelson and Mello 1984; Ward et al. 1997). Such
cannabis self-administration is dose-dependent, i.e., marijuana smokers choose to smoke
high-potency cigarettes over low-potency cigarettes (Chait and Burke 1994; Kelly et al. 1997).
Furthermore, a distinct cannabis withdrawal syndrome—characterized by irritability, craving,
and disrupted sleep and food intake—is observed upon cessation of marijuana or THC intake
(Budney et al. 2004; Haney 2005; Kouri and Pope 2000). This withdrawal syndrome manifests
itself after approximately 24 h of abstinence (Budney et al. 2004; Haney 2005) and lasts for several weeks (Kouri and Pope 2000). In the human laboratory setting, this withdrawal syndrome
is rapidly alleviated by re-administration of marijuana or THC in double-blind fashion (Haney
et al. 1999, 2004; Hart et al. 2002).

177

178

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

9.5.2 Cannabis addiction at the human clinical level

Cannabis is the most widely used illicit drug in the world (Anthony et al. 1994). Approximately
100 million Americans have used illicit marijuana, with approximately 8–10% developing cannabis dependence (Crean et al. 2011). In the US, approximately 25% of all high school seniors state
that they have smoked marijuana within the last 30 days, with approximately 2–3 million new
marijuana users every year, two-thirds of them being between the ages of 12 and 17 (Compton
et al. 2004; ONDCP 2008; SAMHSA 2008). Furthermore, 16% of all substance abuse treatment
admissions to hospital in the US are for cannabis-related disorders; second only to alcoholrelated hospital admissions (Crean et al. 2011). In Canada, the prevalence of past-year cannabis
use by youth was approximately 25% in 2010 (Health Canada 2012). In the UK, approximately
one-third of all adults have tried marijuana, and 2.5 million (mostly 16–29-year-olds) have used
it in the past year (Hoare 2009). In Australia, cannabis is the most widely used illicit substance
(AIHW 2005).
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision and
the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision both include a diagnostic category
for cannabis addiction and dependence (Anthony et al. 1994; Cottler et al. 1995), and the Fifth
Edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders includes cannabis dependence as a medically recognized drug addiction syndrome.
The essential feature of addiction to a chemical substance is a cluster of cognitive, behavioral,
and physiological symptoms—all centering around the fact that the addicted individual continues
use of the substance despite significant harm to his/her health, lifestyle, work, and significant
others (such as family members). Thus, a diagnosis of drug addiction is made if three or more
of the following criteria occur at any time during the same 1-year period (American Psychiatric
Association 1994): (1) tolerance, as defined by either a need for increased amounts of the substance to achieve intoxication or the desired effect, or a markedly diminished effect on the user
with continued use of the substance; (2) withdrawal, as manifested by either characteristic withdrawal symptoms—“drug-opposite” to the effects produced by the dependence-producing drug
(O’Brien 2001)—such as insomnia, drug craving, restlessness, loss of appetite, difficulty in concentration, sweating, mood swings, depression, irritability, anger, or hyperthermia; or the fact
that the same or a chemically closely-related substance is taken to avoid or relieve withdrawal
symptoms; (3) the substance is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period of time than
was originally intended; (4) there is persistent desire to reduce substance use, or unsuccessful
attempts to do so; (5) considerable time and effort is spent obtaining the substance; (6) social,
occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced because of use of the substance;
(7) the substance is used despite knowledge of persistent or recurrent physical or psychological
problems caused by the substance.
Clinically, drug addiction manifests as a syndrome of compulsive drug-seeking behavior
characterized by: (1) impaired control over drug self-administration, (2) compulsive drug self-­
administration, (3) continued self-administration despite obvious harm to self and significant
others, and (4) drug craving. Clinicians in addiction medicine often characterize drug addiction
as “the disease with the 5 Cs”: Chronic disease with impaired Control, Compulsive use, Continued
use despite harm, and Craving for the drug(s) to which the individual has become addicted.
It is sometimes assumed that addictive drug-seeking and drug-taking are driven solely by the
negative consequences of drug dependence, that is, by a desire to mitigate or avoid the unpleasant physical consequences of drug withdrawal (for review, see Gardner 2005). Indeed, avoidance
of withdrawal symptoms can serve as a motivation for drug-taking in human addicts, and some

Cannabinoids and Addiction

addicts do worry about the onset of withdrawal symptoms. But the pursuit of the drug-induced
“high” remains the goal. Congruently, addictive drug-seeking and drug-taking are now viewed
as being closely linked to the appetitive properties of addictive drugs (for reviews, see Gardner
2000, 2005; O’Brien 2001). This view has been driven in large measure by the facts that: (1) drugs
that are addictive at the human level are voluntarily self-administered by laboratory animals
(Gardner 2000); (2) such self-administration can take place in the absence of tolerance, physical dependence, withdrawal, or previous drug-taking behavior (e.g., Ternes et al. 1984); (3) the
reward produced by addictive drugs summates with the reward produced by electrical BSR, thus
presumably activating the same neural substrates (Wise 1989, 1996); and (4) addictive drugs are
voluntarily self-administered intracerebrally only into brain loci known to be associated with the
brain’s reward substrates (for reviews, see Gardner 2000, 2005; Wise and Gardner 2002). Thus,
brain-reward mechanisms are currently considered to constitute the fundamental substrate upon
which addictive drugs act to produce their reinforcing and incentive motivational effects (Wise
1996; Wise and Gardner 2002; Gardner 2005).
9.5.3 Can cannabis be considered to be an addictive substance

at the human level?

It seems irrefutable that cannabis can be considered to be addictive at the human level. Winstock
and colleagues have delineated some useful criteria for assessing cannabis addiction upon initial
clinical interview (Winstock et al. 2010). First, does the patient use cannabis on a regular (daily,
weekly) basis? Second, does the patient seek to reduce his/her cannabis use, but fail to achieve
reduction in use? Third, is there evidence of physical dependence upon cannabis? Fourth, does
the patient experience withdrawal symptoms upon cessation of cannabis use? Fifth, does the
patient’s cannabis use produce harm to himself/herself or others? Along somewhat similar lines,
Budney has proffered a distinction between cannabis dependence and cannabis abuse (Budney
2006). Under the category of “dependence” come the following: (1) tolerance; (2) withdrawal;
(3) using for a longer period of time or more than intended; (4) persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to quit or cut down; (5) considerable time spent buying, using, or recovering from the
effects; (6) important activities are given up because of use; (7) continued use despite persistent or
recurrent psychological or physical problems related to use. Under the category of “abuse” come
the following: (1) recurrent use resulting in failure to fulfill major role obligations; (2) recurrent
use in situations that are physically hazardous; (3) recurrent legal problems related to use; (4) continued use despite persistent social or interpersonal problems related to use.
It seems fairly clear that most cannabis users do so for its euphoriant and relaxant effects
(Bromberg 1934; Costa 2007; Grinspoon et al. 2005; Grotenhermen 2007; Winstock et al. 2010),
as well as for additional effects such as enhanced sensory perception, distorted sense of time, and
increased appetite (Winstock et al. 2010). It seems equally clear that tolerance develops to such
effects with repeated cannabis use (Swift et al. 1998). A cannabis withdrawal syndrome has been
well described (Budney and Hughes 2006; Budney et al. 2001, 2003), and is reported by up to
one-third of heavy cannabis users and more than one-half of those seeking treatment for cannabis dependence (Budney and Hughes 2006). Compellingly, this withdrawal syndrome is rapidly
alleviated by readministration of cannabis or THC in both human laboratory (Haney et al. 1999,
2004; Hart et al. 2002) and clinical (Budney et al. 1999, 2007; Stephens et al. 1993; 2000) settings.
Understandably, the cannabis withdrawal syndrome can serve as a negative reinforcer for relapse
to cannabis use among cannabis users attempting to maintain abstinence (Budney and Hughes
2006; Copersino et al. 2006).

179

180

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Under the category of continued use despite harm to self and/or others, it now seems clear that
dependent cannabis use fits this criterion of addiction also. Impaired attention and memory have
been reported to be hallmarks of cannabis use (Ranganathan and D’Souza 2006), as has severe
motor incoordination (Li et al. 2012; Papafotiou et al. 2005). Additional probable harmful effects
associated with chronic cannabis use include cognitive deficits (decision-making, planning, concept formation, organization and processing of complex information), pulmonary disease, oropharyngeal and lung cancers, and decreased female fertility (Crean et al. 2011; Lundqvist 2005;
Winstock et al. 2010). Cannabis dependence in adolescence appears to be especially harmful,
being associated with codependence upon alcohol and other addictive substances, poor academic and educational achievement, truancy, delinquency, criminal behavior, unemployment, poor
interpersonal relationships, and exacerbation of anxiety, depression, and schizophrenia (Sofuoglu
et al. 2010; Winstock et al. 2010). Chronic cannabis use is associated with twice the normal risk of
schizophrenia, with evidence that starting cannabis use before age 16 substantially increases the
risk (Moore et al. 2007).

9.6 Two additional interesting phytocannabinoids with possible

relevance for addiction
9.6.1 Cannabidiol

CBD is abundantly present in cannabis (Mechoulam et al. 2007; Pertwee 2004; Russo 2011) and
displays the interesting property of antagonizing CB1 receptors at low nanomolar concentrations
in the presence of THC, despite having little binding affinity at that site (Pertwee 2008; Russo
2011; Thomas et al. 2007). A number of laboratories have reported that pharmacological blockade or genetic deletion of the CB1 receptor in laboratory rodents markedly attenuates the actions
of addictive drugs (e.g., heroin, cocaine) in several animal models of drug addiction—including
electrical brain-stimulation reward, enhanced nucleus accumbens dopamine, intravenous drug
self-administration, and reinstatement of drug-seeking behavior after behavioral extinction of
the drug self-administration habit (e.g., De Vries et al. 2001; Fattore et al. 2005; Li et al. 2009; Xi
et al. 2006, 2008). This raises the question—might CBD show anti-addiction properties? Two
preliminary pieces of evidence suggest that this might be so. Ren et al. (2009) found that, in laboratory rats, CBD significantly attenuates heroin-seeking behavior reinstated by exposure to a
conditioned environmental cue previously uniquely associated with heroin-taking behavior. This
effect was exceedingly prolonged—still present 2 weeks after acute CBD administration. In addition, CBD normalized the abnormal CB1 receptor expression observed in the NAc associated with
stimulus cue-induced relapse to heroin-seeking behavior. On the other hand, CBD did not alter
stable heroin self-administration, extinction responding after replacement of heroin by saline, or
heroin-primed reinstatement of heroin-seeking behavior. In humans, Morgan et al. (2010) found
that CBD attenuates the appetitive effects of THC in smoked cannabis.
9.6.2 THCV

While CB1 receptor antagonists may possess anti-addiction efficacy (see earlier sections), CB2
receptor agonists may possess similar properties (Xi et al. 2011). Both Δ9- and Δ8-THCV appear
to have antagonist action at the CB1 receptor and agonist action at the CB2 receptor (Bátkai et al.
2012; Pertwee et al. 2007). Given these effects of Δ9- and Δ8-THCV at CB1 and at CB2 receptors,
the possibility arises that these cannabinoids could show anti-addiction effects in standard models of addiction. Future experiments may yield an answer.

Cannabinoids and Addiction

9.7 Concluding remarks
On the basis of evidence at the animal laboratory, human laboratory, and human clinical levels, it
appears that cannabis use carries with it the risk of cannabis addiction. At all three levels, cannabis
addiction appears to fit the criteria for addiction established for such other addictive substances
as alcohol, nicotine, opioids, and psychostimulants. The rate of cannabis addiction appears to
be low—in the range of 8–10% of users (Wagner and Anthony 2002; Winstock et al. 2010). Two
interesting phytocannabinoids—CBD and THCV—may possess anti-addiction efficacy.

Disclosure statement
Author’s contribution to the Work was done as part of the Author’s official duties as an NIH employee
and is a Work of the United States Government. Therefore, copyright may not be established in the
United States. Apart from his salary from the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the author receives
no funding from any source that could be construed as constituting a conflict of interest.

References
AIHW (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare). (2005). 2004 National Drug Strategy Household
Survey: First Results (AIHW Cat. No. PHE 57; Drug Statistics Series No. 13). Canberra: Australian
Institute of Health and Welfare.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th ed.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Anthony, J., Warner, L. and Kessler, R. (1994). Comparative epidemiology of dependence on tobacco,
alcohol, controlled substances, and inhalants: basic findings from the National Comorbity Survey.
Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 2, 244–268.
Ashby, C.R. Jr., Paul, M., Gardner, E.L., et al. (2002). Systemic administration of 1R,4S-4-aminocyclopent-2-ene-carboxylic acid, a reversible inhibitor of GABA transaminase, blocks expression of conditioned place preference to cocaine and nicotine in rats. Synapse, 44, 61–63.
Ashby, C.R. Jr., Paul, M., Gardner, E.L., Heidbreder, C.A., and Hagan, J.J. (2003). Acute administration
of the selective D3 receptor antagonist SB-277011A blocks the acquisition and expression of the conditioned place preference response to heroin in male rats. Synapse, 48, 154–156.
Balster, R.L. (1991). Drug abuse potential evaluation in animals. British Journal on Addictions, 86, 1549–1558.
Bátkai, S., Mukhopadhyay, P., Horváth, B., et al. (2012). Δ8-Tetrahydrocannabivarin prevents hepatic
ischaemia/reperfusion injury by decreasing oxidative stress and inflammatory responses through cannabinoid CB2 receptors. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165, 2450–2461.
Blum, K., Sheridan, P.J., Wood, R.C., et al. (1996). The D2 dopamine receptor gene as a determinant of
reward deficiency syndrome. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 89, 396–400.
Bossert, J.M., Ghitza, U.E., Lu, L., Epstein, D.H., and Shaham, Y. (2005). Neurobiology of relapse to heroin
and cocaine seeking: an update and clinical implications. European Journal of Pharmacology, 526, 36–50.
Brady, J.V., Griffiths, R.R., Hienz, R.D., Ator, N.A., Lukas, S.E., and Lamb, R.J. (1987). Assessing drugs
for abuse liability and dependence potential in laboratory primates. In: M.A. Bozarth (ed.). Methods of
Assessing the Reinforcing Properties of Abused Drugs. New York: Springer Verlag, pp. 45–86.
Bromberg, W. (1934). Marihuana intoxication: a clinical study of Cannabis sativa intoxication. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 91, 303–330.
Budney, A.J. (2006). Are specific dependence criteria necessary for different substances: how can research
on cannabis inform this issue? Addiction, 101(Suppl. 1), 125–133.
Budney, A.J. and Hughes, J.R. (2006). The cannabis withdrawal syndrome. Current Opinion in Psychiatry,
19, 233–238.

181

182

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Budney, A.J., Hughes, J.R., Moore, B.A., and Novy, P.L. (2001). Marijuana abstinence effects in marijuana
smokers maintained in their home environment. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58, 917–924.
Budney, A.J., Hughes, J.R., Moore, B.A., and Vandrey, R. (2004). Review of the validity and significance of
cannabis withdrawal syndrome. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 1967–1977.
Budney, A.J., Moore, B.A., Vandrey, R.G., and Hughes, J.R. (2003). The time course and significance of
cannabis withdrawal. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112, 393–402.
Budney, A.J., Novy, P.L., and Hughes, J.R. (1999). Marijuana withdrawal among adults seeking treatment
for marijuana dependence. Addiction, 94, 1311–1321.
Budney, A.J., Vandrey, R.G., Hughes, J.R., Moore, B.A., and Bahrenburg, B. (2007). Oral delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol suppresses cannabis withdrawal symptoms. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 86,
22–29.
Carboni, E., Imperato, A., Perezzani, L., and Di Chiara, G. (1989). Amphetamine, cocaine, phencyclidine
and nomifensine increase extracellular dopamine concentrations preferentially in the nucleus accumbens of freely moving rats. Neuroscience, 28, 653–661.
Carlezon, W.A. Jr., Devine, D.P., and Wise, R.A. (1995). Habit-forming actions of nomifensine in nucleus
accumbens. Psychopharmacology, 122, 194–197.
Chait, L.D. and Burke, K.A. (1994). Preference for high- versus low-potency marijuana. Pharmacology
Biochemistry and Behavior, 49, 643–647.
Chait, L.D. and Zacny, J.P. (1992). Reinforcing and subjective effects of oral Δ9-THC and smoked marijuana in humans. Psychopharmacology, 107, 255–262.
Chang, J.-Y., Sawyer, S.F., Lee, R.-S., and Woodward, D.J. (1994). Electrophysiological and pharmacological evidence for the role of the nucleus accumbens in cocaine self-administration in freely moving rats.
Journal of Neuroscience, 14, 1224–1244.
Cheer, J.F., Marsden, C.A., Kendall, D.A., and Mason, R. (2000). Lack of response suppression follows repeated ventral tegmental cannabinoid administration: an in vitro electrophysiological study.
Neuroscience, 99, 661–667.
Chen, J., Paredes, W., Li, J., Smith, D., Lowinson, J., and Gardner, E.L. (1990). Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol
produces naloxone-blockable enhancement of presynaptic basal dopamine efflux in nucleus accumbens
of conscious, freely-moving rats as measured by intracerebral microdialysis. Psychopharmacology, 102,
156–162.
Chen, J., Marmur, R., Pulles, A., Paredes, W., and Gardner, E.L. (1993). Ventral tegmental microinjection
of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol enhances ventral tegmental somatodendritic dopamine levels but not forebrain dopamine levels: evidence for local neural action by marijuana's psychoactive ingredient. Brain
Research, 621, 65–70.
Comings, D.E. and Blum, K. (2000). Reward deficiency syndrome: genetic aspects of behavioral disorders.
Progress in Brain Research, 126, 325–341.
Compton, W.M., Grant, B.F., Colliver, J.D., Glantz, M.D., and Stinson, F.S. (2004). Prevalence of marijuana use disorders in the United States: 1991-1992 and 2001-2002. JAMA, 291, 2114–2121.
Cooper, A., Barnea-Ygael, N., Levy, D., Shaham, Y., and Zangen, A. (2007). A conflict rat model of cueinduced relapse to cocaine seeking. Psychopharmacology, 194, 117–125.
Copersino, M.L., Boyd, S.J., Tashkin, D.P., et al. (2006). Cannabis withdrawal among non-treatmentseeking adult cannabis users. American Journal on Addictions, 15, 8–14.
Costa, B. (2007). On the pharmacological properties of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Chemistry and
Biodiversity, 4, 1664–1677.
Cottler, L.B., Schuckit, M.A., Helzer, J.E., et al. (1995). The DSM-IV field trial for substance use disorders:
major results. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 38, 59–69.
Crean, R.D., Crane, N.A., and Mason, B.J. (2011). An evidence-based review of acute and long-term
effects of cannabis use on executive cognitive functions. Journal of Addiction Medicine, 5, 1–8.

Cannabinoids and Addiction

Crombag, H.S., Bossert, J.M., Koya, E., and Shaham, Y. (2008). Context-induced relapse to drug
seeking: a review. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. Series B, Biological Sciences, 363,
3233–3243.
Der-Avakian, A. and Markou, A. (2012). The neurobiology of anhedonia and other reward-related deficits.
Trends in Neurosciences, 35, 68–77.
De Vries, T.J., Shaham, Y., Homberg, J.R., et al. (2001). A cannabinoid mechanism in relapse to cocaine
seeking. Nature Medicine, 7, 1151–1154.
Diana, M., Melis, M., and Gessa, G.L. (1998). Increase in meso-prefrontal dopaminergic activity after stimulation of CB1 receptors by cannabinoids. European Journal of Neuroscience, 10, 2825–2830.
Di Chiara, G. and Imperato, A. (1986). Preferential stimulation of dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens by opiates, alcohol, and barbiturates: studies with transcerebral dialysis in freely moving rats.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 473, 367–381.
Di Chiara, G. and Imperato, A. (1988). Drugs abused by humans preferentially increase synaptic dopamine
concentrations in the mesolimbic system of freely moving rats. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 85, 5274–5278.
Elsohly, M.A. and Slade, D. (2005). Chemical constituents of marijuana: the complex mixture of natural
cannabinoids. Life Sciences, 78, 539–548.
Epping-Jordan, M.P., Watkins, S.S., Koob, G.F., and Markou, A. (1998). Dramatic decreases in brain
reward function during nicotine withdrawal. Nature, 393, 76–79.
Epstein, D.H., Preston, K.L., Stewart, J., and Shaham, Y. (2006). Toward a model of drug relapse: an
assessment of the validity of the reinstatement procedure. Psychopharmacology, 189, 1–16.
Fattore, L., Spano, S., Cossu, G., Deiana, S., Fadda, P., and Fratta, W. (2005). Cannabinoid CB1 antagonist SR 141716A attenuates reinstatement of heroin self-administration in heroin-abstinent rats.
Neuropharmacology, 48, 1097–1104.
French, E.D. (1997). Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol excites rat VTA dopamine neurons through activation of
cannabinoid CB1 but not opioid receptors. Neuroscience Letters, 226, 159–162.
French, E.D., Dillon, K., and Wu, X. (1997). Cannabinoids excite dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmentum and substantia nigra. Neuroreport, 8, 649–652.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964). Isolation, structure and partial synthesis of an active constituent of
hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86, 1646–1647.
Gardner, E.L. (1999). Neurobiology and genetics of addiction: implications of “reward deficiency syndrome” for therapeutic strategies in chemical dependency. In: J. Elster (ed.), Addiction: Entries and Exits.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 57–119.
Gardner, E.L. (2000). What we have learned about addiction from animal models of drug self-administration.
American Journal on Addictions, 9, 285–313.
Gardner, E.L. (2005). Brain reward mechanisms. In: J.H. Lowinson, P. Ruiz, R.B. Millman, and J.G. Langrod
(eds.). Substance Abuse: A Comprehensive Textbook. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, pp. 48–97.
Gardner, E.L. (2011). Addiction and brain reward and anti-reward pathways. Advances in Psychosomatic
Medicine, 30, 22–60.
Gardner, E.L. and David, J. (1999). The neurobiology of chemical addiction. In: J. Elster, and O.-J. Skog
(eds.). Getting Hooked: Rationality and Addiction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 93–136.
Gardner, E.L. and Vorel, S.R. (1998). Cannabinoid transmission and reward-related events. Neurobiology
of Disease, 5, 502–533.
Gardner, E.L. and Wise, R.A. (2009). Animal models of addiction. In: D.S. Charney, and E.J. Nestler (eds.).
Neurobiology of Mental Illness. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 757–774.
Gonon, F.G. (1988). Nonlinear relationship between impulse flow and dopamine released by rat midbrain
dopaminergic neurons as studied by in vivo electrochemistry. Neuroscience, 24, 19–28.

183

184

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Grinspoon, L., Bakalar, J.B. and Russo, E. (2005). Marijuana: clinical aspects. In: J.H. Lowinson,
P. Ruiz, R.B. Millman, and J.G. Langrod (eds.). Substance Abuse: A Comprehensive Textbook. 4th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp. 263–276.
Grotenhermen, F. (2007). The toxicology of cannabis and cannabis prohibition. Chemistry and Biodiversity,
4, 1744–1769.
Haber, S.N., Fudge, J.L., and McFarland, N.R. (2000). Striatonigrostriatal pathways in primates form an
ascending spiral from the shell to the dorsolateral striatum. Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 2369–2382.
Haney, M. (2005). The marijuana withdrawal syndrome: diagnosis and treatment. Current Psychiatry
Reports, 7, 360–366.
Haney, M. (2009). Self-administration of cocaine, cannabis and heroin in the human laboratory: benefits
and pitfalls. Addiction Biology, 14, 9–21.
Haney, M., Comer, S.D., Ward, A.S., Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M.W. (1997). Factors influencing marijuana self-administration by humans. Behavioural Pharmacology, 8, 101–112.
Haney, M., Ward, A.S., Comer, S.D., Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M.W. (1999). Abstinence symptoms
following smoked marijuana in humans. Psychopharmacology, 4, 395–404.
Haney, M., Hart, C.L., Vosburg, S.K., et al. (2004). Marijuana withdrawal in humans: effects of oral THC
or divalproex. Neuropsychopharmacology, 29, 158–170.
Hart, C., Ward, A.S., Haney, M., Comer, S.C., Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M.W. (2002). Comparison of
smoked marijuana and oral Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in humans. Psychopharmacology, 154, 407–415.
Hayes, R.J., Vorel, S.R., Spector, J., Liu, X., and Gardner, E.L. (2003). Electrical and chemical stimulation of the basolateral complex of the amygdala reinstates cocaine-seeking behavior in the rat.
Psychopharmacology, 168, 75–83.
Health Canada (2012). Canadian Alcohol and Drug Use Monitoring Survey, Summary of Results For 2010.
Ottawa, Ontario: Office of Drugs and Alcohol Research and Surveillance, Controlled Substances and
Tobacco Directorate, Health Canada.
Hoare, J. (2009). Drug Misuse Declared: Findings from the 2008/09 British Crime Survey. London: Home Office.
Horan, B., Gardner, E.L., Dewey, S.L., Brodie, J.D., and Ashby, C.R. Jr. (2001). The selective σ1 receptor
agonist, 1-(3,4-dimethoxyphenethyl)-4-(phenylpropyl)piperazine (SA4503), blocks the acquisition of
the conditioned place preference response to (-)-nicotine in rats. European Journal of Pharmacology,
426, R1–R2.
Hubbard, R.L., Craddock, S.G., and Anderson, J. (2003). Overview of 5-year follow-up outcomes in the
Drug Abuse Treatment Outcome Study (DATOS). Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 25, 125–134.
Justinova, Z., Tanda, G., Redhi, G.H., and Goldberg, S.R. (2003). Self-administration of Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) by drug naive squirrel monkeys. Psychopharmacology, 169, 135–140.
Kelly, T.H., Foltin, R.W., Emurian, C.S., and Fischman, M.W. (1997). Are choice and self-administration
of marijuana related to Δ9-THC content? Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 5, 74–82.
Kenny, P.J., Polis, I., Koob, G.F., and Markou, A. (2003). Low dose cocaine self-administration transiently
increases but high dose cocaine persistently decreases brain reward function in rats. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 17, 191–195.
Kokkinidis, L. and McCarter, B.D. (1990). Postcocaine depression and sensitization of brain-stimulation
reward: analysis of reinforcement and performance effects. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior,
36, 463–471.
Koob, G.F. (2009a). Dynamics of neuronal circuits in addiction: reward, antireward, and emotional memory. Pharmacopsychiatry, 42(Suppl. 1), S32–S41.
Koob, G.F. (2009b). Neurobiological substrates for the dark side of compulsivity in addiction.
Neuropharmacology, 56(Suppl. 1), 18–31.
Koob, G.F. (2013). Theoretical frameworks and mechanistic aspects of alcohol addiction: alcohol addiction
as a reward deficit disorder. Current Topics in Behavioral Neuroscience, 13, 3–30.

Cannabinoids and Addiction

Koob, G.F. and Le Moal, M. (2008). Neurobiological mechanisms for opponent motivational processes in
addiction. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. Series B, Biological Sciences, 363, 3113–3123.
Koob, G.F. and Wee, S. (2010). The role of the dynorphin-kappa opioid system in the reinforcing effects of
drugs of abuse. Psychopharmacology, 210, 121–135.
Kouri, E.M. and Pope, H.G. Jr. (2000). Abstinence symptoms during withdrawal from chronic marijuana
use. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 8, 483–492.
Lê, A. and Shaham, Y. (2002). Neurobiology of relapse to alcohol in rats. Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
94, 137–156.
Lee, R.-S., Criado, J.R., Koob, G.F., and Henriksen, S.J. (1999). Cellular responses of nucleus accumbens
neurons to opiate-seeking behavior: I. sustained responding during heroin self-administration. Synapse,
33, 49–58.
Lepore, M., Vorel, S.R., Lowinson, J., and Gardner, E.L. (1995). Conditioned place preference induced by Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol: comparison with cocaine, morphine, and food reward. Life Sciences, 56, 2073–2080.
Lepore, M., Liu, X., Savage, V., Matalon, D., and Gardner, E.L. (1996). Genetic differences in Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol-induced facilitation of brain stimulation reward as measured by a rate-frequency
curve-shift electrical brain stimulation paradigm in three different rat strains. Life Sciences [Pharmacology
Letters], 58, PL365–PL372.
Li, M.-C., Brady, J.E., DiMaggio, C.J., Lusardi, A.R., Tzong, K.Y., and Li, G. (2012). Marijuana use and
motor vehicle crashes. Epidemiologic Reviews, 34, 65–72.
Li, X., Hoffman, A.F., Peng, X.-Q., Lupica, C.R., Gardner, E.L., and Xi, Z.-X. (2009). Attenuation of basal
and cocaine-enhanced locomotion and nucleus accumbens dopamine in cannabinoid CB1-receptorknockout mice. Psychopharmacology, 204, 1–11.
Liao, R.-M., Chang, Y.-H., Wang, S.-H., and Lan, C.-H. (2000). Distinct accumbal subareas are involved in
place conditioning of amphetamine and cocaine. Life Sciences, 67, 2033–2043.
Lile, J.A. and Nader, M.A. (2003). The abuse liability and therapeutic potential of drugs evaluated for
cocaine addiction as predicted by animal models. Current Neuropharmacology, 1, 21–46.
Lundqvist, T. (2005). Cognitive consequences of cannabis use: comparison with abuse of stimulants and
heroin with regard to attention, memory and executive functions. Pharmacology Biochemistry and
Behavior, 81, 319–330.
Maldonado, R., Berrendero, F., Ozaita, A., and Robledo, P. (2011). Neurochemical basis of cannabis
addiction. Neuroscience, 181, 1–17.
Mechoulam, R., Shani, A., Edery, H., and Grunfeld, Y. (1970). Chemical basis of hashish activity. Science,
169, 611–612.
Mechoulam, R., Peters, M., Murillo-Rodriguez, E., and Hanuš, L.O. (2007). Cannabidiol – recent advances. Chemistry and Biodiversity, 4, 1678–1692.
Mendelson, J.H. and Mello, N.K. (1984). Reinforcing properties of oral Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, smoked
marijuana, and nabilone: influence of previous marijuana use. Psychopharmacology, 83, 351–356.
Mendelson, J.H., Kuehnle, J.C., Greenberg, I., and Mello, N.K. (1976). Operant acquisition of marijuana
in man. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 198, 42–53.
Milkman, H., Weiner, S.E., and Sunderwirth, S. (1983-84). Addiction relapse. Advances in Alcohol and
Substance Abuse, 3, 119–134.
Milton, A.L. and Everitt, B.J. (2012). The persistence of maladaptive memory: addiction, drug memories
and anti-relapse treatments. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 36, 1119–1139.
Moore, T.H.M., Zammit, S., Lingford-Hughes, A., et al. (2007). Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or
affective mental health outcomes: a systematic review. Lancet, 370, 319–328.
Morgan, C.J., Freeman, T.P., Schafer, G.L., and Curran, H.V. (2010). Cannabidiol attenuates
the appetitive effects of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in humans smoking their chosen cannabis.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 35, 1879–1885.

185

186

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Nazzaro, J.M., Seeger, T.F., and Gardner, E.L. (1981). Morphine differentially affects ventral tegmental and substantia nigra brain reward thresholds. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 14,
325–331.
O’Brien, C.P. (2001). Drug addiction and drug abuse. In: J.G. Hardman, L.E. Limbird, and A.G. Gilman
(eds.). Goodman and Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. 10th ed. New York: McGrawHill, pp. 621–642.
O’Brien, C.P. and Gardner, E.L. (2005). Critical assessment of how to study addiction and its treatment:
human and non-human animal models. Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 108, 18–58.
ONDCP (Office of National Drug Control Policy). (2008). Marijuana: the Greatest Cause of Illegal
Drug Abuse (2008 Marijuana Sourcebook). Washington, DC: Office of National Drug Control Policy,
Executive Office of the President.
Pak, A.C., Ashby, C.R. Jr., Heidbreder, C.A., et al. (2006). The selective dopamine D3 receptor antagonist
SB-277011A reduces nicotine-enhanced brain reward and nicotine-paired environmental cue functions.
International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 9, 585–602.
Papafotiou, K., Carter, J.D., and Stough, C. (2005). The relationship between performance on the standardised field sobriety tests, driving performance and the level of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in
blood. Forensic Science International, 155, 172–178.
Peoples, L.L. and Cavanaugh, D. (2003). Differential changes in signal and background firing of accumbal
neurons during cocaine self-administration. Journal of Neurophysiology, 90, 993–1010.
Peoples, L.L., Uzwiak, A.J., Gee, F., et al. (1999). Phasic accumbal firing may contribute to the regulation
of drug taking during intravenous cocaine self-administration sessions. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 877, 781–787.
Pertwee, R.G. (2004). The pharmacology and therapeutic potential of cannabidiol. In: V. DiMarzo (ed.).
Cannabinoids. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 32–83.
Pertwee, R.G. (2005). Pharmacological actions of cannabinoids. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology,
168, 1–51.
Pertwee, R.G., Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A., et al. (2007). The psychoactive plant cannabinoid, Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol, is antagonized by Δ8- and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin in mice in vivo. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 586–594.
Pertwee, R.G. (2008). The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology of three plant cannabinoids: Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin. British Journal of Pharmacology,
153, 199–215.
Ranganathan, M. and D’Souza, D.C. (2006). The acute effects of cannabinoids on memory in humans: a
review. Psychopharmacology, 188, 425–444.
Robbins, T.W. and Everitt, B.J. (2002). Limbic-striatal memory systems and drug addiction. Neurobiology
of Learning and Memory, 78, 625–636.
Russo, E.B. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage
effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1344–1364.
SAMHSA (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; Office of Applied Studies,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). (2008). Results From the 2008 National Survey on
Drug Use and Health: National Findings (NSDUH Series H-36, HHS Publication No. SMA 09-4434).
Rockville, Maryland: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Schultz, W., Apicella, P., Scarnati, E., and Ljungberg, T. (1992). Neuronal activity in monkey ventral striatum related to the expectation of reward. Journal of Neuroscience, 12, 4595–4610.
Schultz, W., Apicella, P., and Ljungberg, T. (1993). Responses of monkey dopamine neurons to reward
and conditioned stimuli during successive steps of learning a delayed response task. Journal of
Neuroscience, 13, 900–913.
Schultz, W. (1994). Behavior-related activity of primate dopamine neurons. Revue Neurologique, 150,
634–639.

Cannabinoids and Addiction

Shaham, Y., Shalev, U., Lu, L., De Wit, H., and Stewart, J. (2002). The reinstatement model of drug
relapse: history, methodology and major findings. Psychopharmacology, 168, 3–20.
Shalev, U., Grimm, J.W., and Shaham, Y. (2002). Neurobiology of relapse to heroin and cocaine seeking: a
review. Pharmacological Reviews, 54, 1–42.
Sofuoglu, M., Sugarman, D.E., and Carroll, K.M. (2010). Cognitive function as an emerging treatment target for marijuana addiction. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 18, 109–119.
Spiller, K., Xi, Z.-X. and Peng, X.-Q., et al. (2008). The selective dopamine D3 receptor antagonists SB-277011A
and NGB 2904 and the putative partial D3 receptor agonist BP-897 attenuate methamphetamine-enhanced
brain-stimulation reward in rats. Psychopharmacology, 196, 533–542.
Stephens, R.S., Roffman, R.A., and Simpson, E.E. (1993). Adult marijuana users seeking treatment. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 1100–1114.
Stephens, R.S., Roffman, R.A., and Curtin, L. (2000). Comparison of extended versus brief treatments for
marijuana use. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 898–908.
Swift, W., Hall, W., and Copeland, J. (1998). Characteristics of long term cannabis users in Sydney,
Australia. European Addiction Research, 4, 190–197.
Tanda, G., Pontieri, F.E., and Di Chiara, G. (1997). Cannabinoid and heroin activation of mesolimbic
dopamine transmission by a common μ1 opioid receptor mechanism. Science, 276, 2048–2050.
Ternes, J.W., Ehrman, R., and O’Brien, C.P. (1984). Nondependent monkeys self-administer hydromorphone. Behavioral Neuroscience, 99, 583–588.
Thomas, A., Baillie, G.L., Phillips, A.M., Razdan, R.K., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2007). Cannabidiol
displays unexpectedly high potency as an antagonist of CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists in vitro. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 613–623.
Turner, C.E., Elsohly, M.A., and Boeren, E.G. (1980). Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. XVII. A review of
the natural constituents. Journal of Natural Products, 43, 169–234.
Tzschentke, T.M. (1998). Measuring reward with the conditioned place preference paradigm: a comprehensive review of drug effects, recent progress and new issues. Progress in Neurobiology, 56, 613–672.
Tzschentke, T.M. (2007). Measuring reward with the conditioned place preference (CPP) paradigm: update
of the last decade. Addiction Biology, 12, 227–462.
Tzschentke, T.M. and Schmidt, W.J. (2000). Effects of the non-competitive NMDA-receptor antagonist
memantine on morphine- and cocaine-induced potentiation of lateral hypothalamic brain stimulation
reward. Psychopharmacology, 149, 225–234.
Valjent, E. and Maldonado, R. (2000). A behavioural model to reveal place preference to Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol in mice. Psychopharmacology, 147, 436–438.
Vorel, S.R., Liu, X., Hayes, R.J., Spector, J.A., and Gardner, E.L. (2001). Relapse to cocaine-seeking after
hippocampal theta burst stimulation. Science, 292, 1175–1178.
Wagner, F.A. and Anthony, J.C. (2002). From first drug use to drug dependence; developmental periods of risk for dependence upon marijuana, cocaine, and alcohol. Neuropsychopharmacology, 26,
479–488.
Ward, A.S., Comer, S.D., Haney, M., Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M.W. (1997). The effects of a monetary
alternative on marijuana self-administration. Behavioural Pharmacology, 8, 275–286.
Winstock, A.R., Ford, C., and Witton, J. (2010). Assessment and management of cannabis use disorders in
primary care. British Medical Journal, 340, 800–804.
Wise, R.A. (1989). The brain and reward. In: J.M. Liebman and S.J. Cooper (eds.). The
Neuropharmacological Basis of Reward. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 377–424.
Wise, R.A. (1996). Addictive drugs and brain stimulation reward. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 19,
319–340.
Wise, R.A. and Gardner, E.L. (2002). Functional anatomy of substance-related disorders. In: H. D’haenen,
J.A. den Boer, and P. Willner (eds.) Biological Psychiatry. New York: Wiley, pp. 509–522.

187

188

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Woody, G.E., Kane, V., Lewis, K., and Thompson, R. (2007). Premature deaths after discharge from methadone maintenance: a replication. Journal of Addiction Medicine, 1, 180–185.
Wu, X. and French, E.D. (2000). Effects of chronic Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol on rat midbrain neurons: an
electrophysiological assessment. Neuropharmacology, 39, 391–398.
Xi, Z.-X., Gilbert, J., Campos, A.C., et al. (2004). Blockade of mesolimbic dopamine D3 receptors inhibits
stress-induced reinstatement of cocaine-seeking in rats. Psychopharmacology, 176, 57–65.
Xi, Z.-X., Gilbert, J.G., Peng, X.-Q., Pak, A.C., Li, X., and Gardner, E.L. (2006). Cannabinoid CB1 receptor
antagonist AM251 inhibits cocaine-primed relapse in rats: role of glutamate in the nucleus accumbens.
Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 8531–8536.
Xi, Z.-X., Spiller, K., Pak, A.C., et al. (2008). Cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonists attenuate cocaine's
rewarding effects: experiments with self-administration and brain-stimulation reward in rats.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 33, 1735–1745.
Xi, Z.-X., Peng, X.-Q., Li, X., et al. (2011). Brain cannabinoid CB2 receptors modulate cocaine's actions in
mice. Nature Neuroscience, 14, 1160–1166.
Zangen, A., Solinas, M., Ikemoto, S., Goldberg, S.R., and Wise, R.A. (2006). Two brain sites for cannabinoid reward. Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 4901–4907.

Chapter 10

Effects of Phytocannabinoids
on Anxiety, Mood, and the Endocrine
System
Sachin Patel, Matthew N. Hill, and Cecilia J. Hillard

10.1 Introduction
The earliest systematic studies of cannabis and the phytocannabinoids focused on their effects on
mood, anxiety, and the endocrine system. The reasons for this include the prominent effects of the
phytocannabinoids on these important aspects of human psychological and physiological function.
Our understanding of the mechanisms by which delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and other
cannabinoid receptor type 1(CB1) agonists affect neural processes involved in mood and anxiety
regulation is very advanced; however, very little is known about the other phytocannabinoids,
despite hints that cannabidiol (CBD) in particular has effects on both mood and anxiety. Finally,
our understanding of the effects of THC and other phytocannabinoids on endocrine signaling has
lagged behind that of other aspects of these compounds, with the exception of their effects on the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis. It is possible that some of the effects of the phytocannabinoids on mood in particular are mediated by endocrine changes. The purpose of this chapter
is to review our current knowledge of the interactions of the phytocannabinoids with the processing of anxiety, setting of mood, and regulation of the HPA axis, thyroid and growth hormone, and
melatonin.

10.2 Phytocannabinoids and anxiety
Among the diverse psychophysiological consequences of cannabis intoxication and use, effects
on anxiety-related emotional processes are perhaps the best documented (Moreira and Wotjak
2010). Here we will review the scientific literature examining the relationship between underlying
trait anxiety and anxiety disorders, and cannabis use disorders; the adverse effects of acute cannabis intoxication on anxiety-related symptoms; and the therapeutic potential of cannabinoid/
endocannabinoid-based treatment approaches for anxiety disorders.
10.2.1 Why people use cannabis, and what’s anxiety got to do with it?

Anxiety disorders are the most common psychiatric disorders in the general population, and
there is a particularly high incidence of cannabis use in patients with symptoms of anxiety and
anxiety disorders (Crippa et al. 2009). Several hypotheses have been proposed to account for this
unusually high comorbidity. The “tension-reduction hypothesis” posits that cannabis is used to
self-medicate anxiety symptoms, whereas an alternate hypothesis contends that chronic use of

190

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

cannabis increases anxiety symptoms and results in increased vulnerability to anxiety disorders
(Hyman and Sinha 2009). As we describe in the following paragraphs, it is likely that both of these
hypotheses are correct and that cannabis users, like the users of other drugs with dependence
liability, exhibit a trajectory from casual use to dependence and problematic use.
According to the “tension-reduction hypothesis” of cannabis use, negative affect (i.e., feelings
or mood) associated with anxiety disorders could promote cannabis use in an attempt to reduce
symptom severity (Buckner et al. 2007). There is evidence to support this hypothesis. For example, the most common reason chronic users give for their continued cannabis use is to reduce
anxiety and relieve tension (Hyman and Sinha 2009; Reilly et al. 1998). In addition, cannabis users
increase consumption during times of stress (Kaplan et al. 1986), and very often report that coping with stress is an important reason that they use cannabis (Bujarski et al. 2012b; Chabrol et al.
2005; Fox et al. 2011; Hyman and Sinha 2009).
Recent studies indicate that individuals who utilize cannabis for stress coping report higher
rates of arousal, worry and agoraphobic cognition, and higher frequency of cannabis use than
subjects who use cannabis for other reasons (Bonn-Miller et al. 2008). Additionally, heavy cannabis users who meet criteria for being clinically anxious exhibit greater severity and numbers of
marijuana-related problems and nonanxiety psychopathology than nonanxious cannabis users
(Van Dam et al. 2012). Social anxiety is associated with higher cannabis use, cannabis-related
problems, and avoidance/coping motives for cannabis use, especially in males (Buckner et al.
2012). Most convincingly, a 14-year, longitudinal prospective study found that social anxiety disorder at study entry was associated with a 6.5 greater odds for cannabis dependence at follow-up
(Buckner et al. 2008). Overall, it appears that coping motives for cannabis use are widespread and
the presence of anxiety symptoms and anxiety disorders (especially social anxiety disorder) are
associated with increased risk for cannabis use, supporting the tension-reduction hypothesis of
cannabis use disorders.
Bonn-Miller and colleagues have hypothesized that although initial use of cannabis can reduce
anxiety symptoms, long-term use could contribute to worsening of anxiety, increased cannabis
use, and cannabis-related problems (Bonn-Miller et al. 2008). Furthermore, these authors suggest
that some individuals use cannabis to avoid social contact and develop avoidant coping strategies
to stress, which are risk factors for the development of future anxiety disorders. Such a process
may explain the relationship between frequency of cannabis use and risk of developing anxiety
symptoms and disorders (Hayatbakhsh et al. 2007; Patton et al. 2002; Zvolensky et al. 2006, 2008).
Taken together, these data suggest that chronic heavy cannabis use could have deleterious effects
on anxiety symptoms. Indeed, cannabis use can be associated with the emergence of acute adverse
effects including anxiety symptoms and panic as described in later sections; however, a definitive
causal link between chronic cannabis use and the development of anxiety disorders per se remains
speculative.
Laboratory studies in animals provide support for the tension-reduction hypothesis, as well as
cannabis-induced anxiety states. In support of the tension-reduction hypothesis, numerous studies have demonstrated that acute administration of low doses of CB1 receptor agonists can reduce
anxiety behaviors in a variety of animal models (Moreira and Wotjak 2010; Ruehle et al. 2012),
likely through activation of CB1 receptors on glutamatergic nerve terminals (Rey et al. 2012).
On the other hand, 12 days of high-dose cannabinoid treatment increases anxiety behaviors and
neuroendocrine responses to acute stress in rats (Hill and Gorzalka 2006). Thus, preclinical studies support the hypothesis that low doses and infrequent exposure to cannabis constituents can
reduce feelings of anxiety and stress but that chronic use of large amounts has the opposite effect
and could contribute to the development of anxiety and other psychiatric disorders.

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON ANXIETY, MOOD, AND THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

10.2.2 Phytocannabinoids and panic disorder

Panic attacks and panic disorder are a subclass of anxiety-related disorders that have been particularly linked to cannabis use. Epidemiological studies have demonstrated a significant correlation between cannabis dependence and lifetime presence of panic attacks (Zvolensky et al. 2006).
Interestingly, subjects with comorbid cannabis use and panic attacks reported age of onset of
panic attacks 8.6 years earlier than noncannabis users. Evidence supporting a causal relationship
between cannabis use and panic disorders comes from a prospective study examining the effects
of cannabis use, abuse, or dependence at age 16 on the presence of panic attacks or panic disorder at age 24 (Zvolensky et al. 2008). The results of this study indicate an odds ratio between 3.7
and 4.9 for the presence of panic attacks and panic disorder, respectively, in cannabis-dependent
subjects. However, in a further analysis of these data, the effects of cannabis on the development
of panic attacks and panic disorder were not independent from cigarette smoking, so it is difficult
to parse out the contributions of each substance (Zvolensky et al. 2008). Patients with comorbid
cannabis dependence and panic disorder do not differ in their responses rates to standard antidepressant treatment for panic disorder (Dannon et al. 2004).
Several case reports and clinical studies have described subjects who experience acute anxiety
and panic-like reactions to cannabis intoxication, and subsequently developed recurrent panic
attacks in the absence of cannabis use (Dannon et al. 2004; Deas et al. 2000; Langs et al. 1997).
Thus, a subgroup of individuals are particularly susceptible to the anxiogenic effects of cannabis
and these individuals experience recurrent panic attacks and develop panic disorder even if they
never use cannabis again.
Although further studies are clearly needed, emerging evidence suggests that cannabis use and
dependence could represent risk factors for the development of panic attacks and panic disorder,
at least in a subset of susceptible individuals.
10.2.3 Phytocannabinoids and posttraumatic stress disorder

Experiencing or witnessing severe traumatic events can cause posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), which is characterized by re-experiencing the event, avoidance, and hypervigilance. A
PTSD diagnosis is associated with greater risk for cannabis use than stimulant use (Calhoun et al.
2000; Cougle et al. 2011), and rates of PTSD are higher among patients with a cannabis use disorder diagnosis compared with other substance use disorder groups (Bonn-Miller et al. 2012). These
data suggest that patients with PTSD could be more susceptible to tension-reduction motivated
cannabis use (Potter et al. 2011), and that individuals with PTSD could have increased susceptibility to the development of cannabis use disorders (Cornelius et al. 2010). In support of these
hypotheses, past 2-week PTSD symptoms significantly predicted coping motives but not social,
enhancement, or conformity motives for cannabis use (Bujarski et al. 2012a). In addition, lack of
improvement in PTSD symptoms during residential treatment of veterans predicted greater frequency of cannabis use 4 months after treatment (Bonn-Miller et al. 2011). Also consistent with
this hypothesis, use of the synthetic cannabinoid, nabilone, reduced nightmare frequency and
reduced daytime flashbacks in a subset of patients (Fraser 2009), and case-report-level evidence
has suggested cannabis could reduce the severity of PTSD symptoms (Passie et al. 2012). Overall,
these data suggest a strong association between PTSD and cannabis use, and that subjects with
PTSD use cannabis to reduce PTSD symptom severity. However, whether long-term outcomes are
improved or worsened by cannabis use in PTSD patients remains to be determined.
Studies in laboratory animals support a prominent role for cannabinoids in the regulation of fear
responses to traumatic experiences (de Bitencourt et al. 2013; Neumeister 2013; Ruehle et al. 2012).

191

192

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

For example, many studies find that reduced CB1 receptor function impairs the ability of animals
to extinguish conditioned fear behaviors (Lutz 2007; Marsicano et al. 2002) while activating CB1
receptors with direct or indirect CB1 agonists can facilitate extinction of fear memories (Chhatwal
et al. 2009; Gunduz-Cinar et al. 2013; Lin et al. 2009; Pamplona et al. 2008). Together these data
indicate that activation of CB1 receptors reduces the expression of fear in response to reminders
of traumatic experiences, which is consistent with the symptom relief reported by PTSD sufferers
when they use cannabis. Overall, these animal data are consistent with the clinical studies reviewed
earlier, in that they provide experimental support for the tension-reduction motive for cannabis
use in patients with PTSD.
10.2.4 Adverse anxiety reactions to cannabis intoxication

The most commonly provided reasons for continued use by chronic cannabis users are to promote relaxation and reduce tension (Reilly et al. 1998). Paradoxically, the most consistently
documented adverse effect of cannabis intoxication is the appearance of anxiety and panic-like
reactions (Thomas 1996). Bialos documented a case series of subjects experiencing several distinct anxiety states he classified into “free-floating” anxiety and anxiety following psychotomimetic symptoms (Bialos 1970). In general, higher doses of cannabis consumption were associated
with higher incidence of adverse reactions, while “hysterical” or “histrionic” individuals who
utilize primitive defenses, including repression and denial, could be more susceptible to anxious
reactions as conflicted materials emerge during the intoxication experience (Bialos 1970). Lastly,
Bialos noted that stressful or anxiety-provoking environmental situations were often associated
with worse anxiety-related adverse reactions to cannabis intoxication.
These insights are supported by larger studies. Halikas noted that 5% of subjects described anxious or fearful feelings greater than 50% of the time, while 54% of subjects reported experiencing
these effects occasionally (Halikas et al. 1971). Similarly, 22% of cannabis users reported anxiety
or panic attacks after cannabis use (Thomas 1996). Interestingly, the rates of panic attacks were
significantly higher in females (30%) than males (14%). Based on these high rates, Thomas has
suggested that anxiety-related symptoms are the most common adverse reactions to cannabis use
(Thomas 1996, 1993).
Consistent with these human studies suggesting anxiety reactions are common adverse reactions
of cannabis use, laboratory studies using rodents also clearly demonstrate a biphasic effect of cannabinoids on anxiety-related behaviors (Patel and Hillard 2006; Rey et al. 2012). Low doses of THC
and synthetic cannabinoids can reduce anxiety in some models. In contrast, higher doses, or administration of cannabinoids under stressful environmental conditions, uniformly produce anxiogenic
effects in animal studies (Hill and Gorzalka 2004). There is evidence that increased neuronal activity in the amygdala underlies the interaction between environmental stress and anxiety responses
induced by cannabis (Patel et al. 2005). In general, there exists a complex biphasic dose–response
for the effects of cannabinoids on anxiety-like behaviors. Importantly, this curve appears to undergo
a leftward shift under stressful environmental conditions, but may also undergo a rightward shift
under socially permissive situations. This dynamic dose–response relationship could also be shifted
by personality factors and the existence of comorbid mood or anxiety disorders as discussed earlier.
10.2.5 The therapeutic potential of cannabinoid/endocannabinoid-

based treatment approaches for anxiety disorders

There is great interest in advancing cannabinoid and endocannabinoid-based treatment
approaches for anxiety disorders. Overall, three primary approaches have been advocated: (1) the

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON ANXIETY, MOOD, AND THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

use of cannabis-based products, i.e., medicinal marijuana; (2) the use of synthetic cannabinoids;
and (3) the use of pharmaceutical agents that modulate concentrations of endogenously produced
cannabinoids. The use of cannabis products in the form of oral THC or sublingual THC:CBD
(Sativex®) combinations for the treatment of anxiety disorders is not likely to be beneficial due
to their narrow therapeutic window. For example, oral THC and Sativex® both increased anxiety
in a group of healthy cannabis-using subjects (Karschner et al. 2011; Martin-Santos et al. 2012).
Although this effect was not clinically significant, one could reasonably presume that this response
would be more pronounced in patients with anxiety disorders. Additionally, the effects of both
formulations on anxiety were dose-dependent, increasing the chance of potentially worsening
symptoms in patients with anxiety disorders (Karschner et al. 2011). Interestingly, several recent
human and animal studies have suggested that CBD, a phytocannabinoid that does not activate
CB1 or CB2 receptors (Mechoulam et al. 2002), can reduce anxiety in humans (Bergamaschi et al.
2011; Crippa et al. 2011; Das et al. 2013) and in laboratory animals (Campos et al. 2013; UribeMarino et al. 2012). Some authors have suggested these effects could be, in part, mediated via
activation of serotonin 1A receptor subtypes in the brain (Gomes et al. 2011). Further studies into
the efficacy and mechanisms by which CBD modulates anxiety are needed, but initial results suggest this could be a promising new approach for the treatment of anxiety disorders.
The third approach, which is currently focused on pharmacological blockade of endocannabinoid degradation, has many advantages (Hill and Gorzalka 2009a; Ruehle et al. 2012). Specifically,
inhibition of fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), the enzyme that degrades the endocannabinoid
N-arachidonoylethanolamine, reduces anxiety and facilitates extinction of conditioned fear via
activation of CB1 receptors in preclinical studies (Gunduz-Cinar et al. 2013; Kathuria et al. 2003;
Patel and Hillard 2006). Importantly, inhibition of FAAH does not synergize with stress to activate the amygdala (Patel et al. 2005) and does not exhibit a biphasic dose response common to
direct acting CB1 receptor agonists (Patel and Hillard 2006). More recently, inhibition of monoacylglycerol lipase, the enzyme that degrades the endocannabinoid, 2-arachidonoylglycerol, has
also been shown to exhibit anxiolytic effects (Kinsey et al. 2011; Sciolino et al. 2011; Sumislawski
et al. 2011). Given the prominent role for cannabinoid systems in the modulation of anxietyrelated behaviors, the development of novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment of anxiety
disorders based on this system is well supported by clinical and preclinical findings. However, a
caveat is that chronic activation of CB1 receptor signaling could exacerbate current anxiety disorders and/or predispose development of more severe disorders in susceptible individuals.

10.3 Phytocannabinoids, mood, and depression
In addition to its ability to reduce anxiety and produce relaxation, cannabis use is commonly
reported to elevate mood and cause euphoria (Halikas et al. 1971). The mood-enhancing effect
of cannabis likely contributes to the association between mood disorders, particularly depression,
and cannabis use. Similar to the “tension reduction” hypothesis relating cannabis use to anxiety
disorders, a “mood elevating” hypothesis can be proposed to explain the relationship between
cannabis use and depression. In this section, we will review the scientific evidence regarding the
mood effects of cannabinoids, including the evidence that cannabinoids have antidepressant and
pro-depressant properties.
10.3.1 Cannabinoids as antidepressants

Studies examining the ability of cannabis and cannabinoids to reduce depression have yielded
contradictory findings. One study that examined depressive symptoms in a survey of nearly 4500

193

194

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

individuals found that cannabis users had fewer depressive symptoms than nonusers (Denson
and Earleywine 2006). Similarly, case report studies of five individuals suffering from depression
who used cannabis indicated that depression preceded cannabis use in most of the individuals
studied and found evidence of antidepressant effects (Gruber et al. 1996). Self-report questionnaires examining the reasons for cannabis use found that 22% engaged in cannabis use to control symptoms of depression (Ware et al. 2005). While no systematic studies have been carried
out, anecdotal reports of bipolar patients indicate that cannabis use helps regulate symptoms of
depression (Ashton et al. 2005). Multiple studies examining cannabis use in populations suffering from chronic diseases also report reductions in depression and elevation in mood following
cannabis use (Amtmann et al. 2004; Lahat et al. 2012; Page et al. 2003; Williamson and Evans
2000; Woolridge et al. 2005). Taken together, these data are consistent with the hypothesis that
cannabis use has mood elevating and antidepressant properties, particularly in patients with
chronic disease.
In contrast to these reports, two studies that examined the effect of THC administration to
depressed individuals did not find evidence for any clinical antidepressant effect; in fact, considerable dysphoria was observed in some patients (Ablon and Goodwin 1974; Kotin et al. 1973).
There are several factors that could contribute to the differing results of these studies compared to
those discussed previously. First, the subjects to which the THC was administered were primarily naïve to cannabis and thus the psychoactive effects could have been viewed as undesirable.
Self-medication with cannabis by an experienced user likely represents a fundamentally different
process than administration of THC alone to a noncannabis user given the range of positive and
negative reactions to cannabis that individuals report (Halikas et al. 1971; Williamson and Evans
2000). Second, these studies looked exclusively at THC administration, while cannabis itself
contains a wide array of other phytocannabinoids which can synergize, moderate, or oppose the
effects of THC (Russo 2011). For example, pure THC administration has been found to increase
anxiety while co-administration of CBD can counter this effect (Zuardi et al. 1982). Thus, the
presence of CBD could contribute to some of the reported antidepressant effects of cannabis,
which would be absent in studies administering THC alone.
10.3.2 Cannabis use can predispose to depression

Multiple studies have demonstrated that individuals who engaged in excessive cannabis use during adolescence exhibit increased rates of depression later in life (Bovasso 2001; Chen et al. 2002;
Degenhardt et al. 2003; Fairman and Anthony 2012; Green and Ritter 2000; Lynskey et al. 2004).
Light to moderate use of cannabis, even during adolescence, did not correlate with the occurrence
of later depression, indicating that heavy use patterns are key determinants in this relationship.
Harder and colleagues found that the relationship between cannabis and depression was not significant when other variables were included in the analysis (Harder et al. 2006). These investigators suggested an alternative hypothesis that other factor(s) could be at play that both increase risk
for depression and the choice to engage in cannabis use (Harder et al. 2006). For example, individuals who have experienced early life adversity exhibit an increased risk of developing depression
in adulthood (Heim and Nemeroff 2001) and increased propensity to use cannabis (Hayatbakhsh
et al. 2013). Alternately, a study examining twin-pairs in which one exhibits cannabis dependency
and the other does not reported that the cannabis-dependent twin exhibits a 2.5–2.9-fold greater
risk of suicidal ideation and suicide attempts than the nondependent twin, which was even greater
if cannabis use initiated before the age of 17 (Lynskey et al. 2004). Taken together, these data
suggest that excessive cannabis use during adolescence is associated with increased likelihood of
developing depression in adulthood; however, the causative relationship is not understood.

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON ANXIETY, MOOD, AND THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

10.3.3 Animal studies examining the relationship between

cannabinoids and depressive symptoms

The phytocannabinoids THC (Bambico et al. 2012; El-Alfy et al. 2010; Elbatsh et al. 2012; Haring
et al. 2013) and CBD (Campos et al. 2013; El-Alfy et al. 2010; Zanelati et al. 2010) have been
reported to produce antidepressant effects in animal models. The antidepressant effects of THC
are mediated by activation of CB1 receptors and can be mimicked by direct and indirect CB1
receptor agonists (Hill et al. 2009a). On the other hand, CBD appears to exert its antidepressant
action through a direct action on serotonergic 5-HT1A receptors (Zanelati et al. 2010). In contradiction to these data, a few reports have shown that acute administration of THC, or direct CB1
receptor agonists, can produce depressive-like behavioral responses (Egashira et al. 2008; Sano
et al. 2009; Shearman et al. 2003). These effects, however, are likely due to the motor suppressant
effects of higher doses of cannabinoid ligands which can confound interpretation of behaviors
in the forced swim test. In summary, there is a substantial body of preclinical evidence supporting the hypothesis that the phytocannabinoids THC and CBD possess antidepressant actions,
and these effects appear to be primarily mediated by serotonin and catecholaminergic systems
(Bambico et al. 2007; Banerjee et al. 1975; Fisar 2010; McLaughlin et al. 2012).
Preclinical studies support a relationship between cannabinoid exposure during adolescence
and the development of depression in adulthood. In particular, administration of escalating doses
of THC during adolescence results in increased rates of depressive-like behavior in adulthood
(Bambico et al. 2010; Realini et al. 2011; Rubino et al. 2008, 2009). The mechanism for this effect
is likely compromised function of the endocannabinoid system in adulthood. For example, escalating doses of THC during adolescence results in a downregulation of CB1 receptors throughout
limbic regions in the brain known to mediate the effects of cannabinoids on emotionality (Rubino
et al. 2008). In addition, administration to adults of drugs that increase endocannabinoid activation of CB1 receptors is sufficient to reverse the depressive-like phenotype induced by adolescent
exposure to THC (Realini et al. 2011).

10.4 Phytocannabinoids and regulation of endocrine systems
Considerable data demonstrate that processes involved in the regulation of homeostasis, including the autonomic nervous system and endocrine systems, are dysregulated in individuals with
anxiety and mood disorders. In this section, we will examine the effects of the phytocannabinoids
on several endocrine systems that are known to be stress responsive or otherwise contribute to
mood disorders.
10.4.1 Cannabinoids and the HPA axis

HPA axis dysfunction is present in many individuals with major depression and has been hypothesized to contribute to its etiology and symptomatology (Holsboer 2000). Basal cortisol concentrations are elevated in approximately 66% of depressed individuals, particularly those with
the most severe depressive symptoms (Holsboer 2000). Inability of patients to suppress cortisol
release following dexamethasone challenge is considered diagnostic of depressive mood disorders
(Rush et al. 1996). Long-term treatment with all of the effective antidepressant drugs and electroconvulsive shock therapy result in reductions in basal and stress-induced activation of the HPA
axis (Gorzalka and Hill 2011). Thus, hyperactivity of the HPA axis accompanies depression in
many individuals, and attenuation of hyperactive HPA axis activity is a common feature of effective antidepressant therapies.

195

196

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Despite the mood elevating properties of cannabis consumption, studies seem to reliably demonstrate that acute consumption of cannabis (Cone et al. 1986) or THC (D’Souza et al. 2004, 2008;
Kleinloog et al. 2012; Klumpers et al. 2012; Ranganathan et al. 2009) increases the secretion of cortisol in individuals who were either naïve to cannabis or infrequent users. When examined in chronic
cannabis users, the ability of THC administration to increase cortisol levels was blunted indicating
that tolerance develops with regular cannabis use (D’Souza et al. 2008; Ranganathan et al. 2009).
Some (King et al. 2011; Somaini et al. 2012), but not all (Block et al. 1991), studies have also
reported that chronic cannabis users exhibit elevated basal cortisol levels, suggesting that there
may be dysregulation in both the basal and stimulated responses of the HPA axis. Consistent with
this hypothesis, it has been reported that stress-induced activation of the HPA axis is blunted in
chronic adult and adolescent cannabis users (Somaini et al. 2012; van Leeuwen et al. 2011). In
adolescents with an early onset of use, chronic cannabis use is associated with altered diurnal
cortisol rhythms such that cortisol concentrations are higher than normal at night and blunted in
the morning (Huizink and Mulder 2006).
The only study that has examined the effect of CBD on the HPA axis in humans found that
this phytocannabinoid attenuated the diurnal decline in cortisol levels, consistent with an HPA
stimulatory effect (Zuardi et al. 1993).
Preclinical studies of the effects of cannabinoids on HPA axis function have demonstrated
effects of the phytocannabinoids that parallel their effects in humans. Administration of THC
to rodents increases circulating concentrations of corticosterone (the rodent analog of cortisol)
(Steiner and Wotjak 2008) as does CBD (Zuardi et al. 1984). While THC administration increases
HPA axis activity, low doses of other CB1 receptor agonists reduce basal and stress-induced HPA
axis responses in rodents (Patel et al. 2004; Saber-Tehrani et al. 2010). These differential responses
are likely due to distinct neuroanatomical circuits. For example, CB1 receptors within the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus or the basolateral amygdala have been found
to constrain activation of the HPA axis and decrease corticosterone secretion (Di et al. 2003;
Evanson et al. 2010; Ganon-Elazar and Akirav 2009; Hill et al. 2010; Hill et al. 2009b), while pharmacological blockade of noradrenergic or serotonergic receptors, but not glutamatergic receptors,
attenuates cannabinoid-induced corticosterone secretion (McLaughlin et al. 2009). These data
suggest that the ability of cannabinoids to increase HPA axis activity is secondary to activation of
monoaminergic hindbrain nuclei, while the inhibitory effects of cannabinoids on corticosterone
secretion is due to direct actions on limbic and hypothalamic circuitry.
10.4.2 Cannabinoids and the hypothalamic–pituitary–thyroid (HPT) axis

The thyroid hormones, L-thyroxin (T4) and 3,5,3'-triiodothyrionine (T3) are vital for proper
development and metabolic regulation in many mammalian tissues. The thyroid hormones exert
the majority of their effects through binding to nuclear receptors that function as transcription
factors acting through thyroid hormone response elements (Flamant et al. 2007). The brain is an
important target of thyroid hormones and hypothyroidism during the perinatal period in particular results in irreversible, severe cognitive deficits (Bernal 2007). Disorders of the HPT axis
are associated with depressed mood in adults (Joffe 2011). Thyroid hormones and endocannabinoids both participate in the regulation of energy homeostasis; thyroid hormones increase basal
metabolic rate and energy expenditure while endocannabinoids, acting through CB1 receptors,
increase food consumption and energy conservation. Although untested as yet, these data suggest the hypothesis that CB1 receptor regulation of the release of thyrotropin-releasing hormone
(TRH) could be the mechanism by which starvation suppresses thyroid hormone release.

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON ANXIETY, MOOD, AND THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

In a study of chronic cannabis users, Bonnett found that thyrotropin (TSH), T3 and T4 concentrations were all within normal limits and did not correlate with concentrations of THC or its major
metabolites (Bonnet 2013). These findings suggest that chronic exposure of adults to THC does not
produce a long-lasting impact on HPT axis function. However, in light of the importance of thyroid hormones during development, it is quite possible that cannabis use during pregnancy could
have adverse effects on fetal development through dysregulation of the HPT axis. There is evidence
that THC could reduce thyroid hormone efficacy during development. In particular, treatment of a
trophoblast cell line with micromolar concentrations of THC results in inhibition of proliferation and
a nearly threefold reduction in the expression of thyroid receptor β1 (TRβ1) (Khare et al. 2006). This
effect on TRβ1 expression is similar to what occurs in fetal growth restriction (FGR) (Ohara et al.
2004). As marijuana use has been associated with FGR (Zuckerman et al. 1989), these data suggest that
THC exposure during pregnancy could interfere with growth as a result of downregulation of TRβ1.
Treatment of adult rats with THC reduces concentrations of T3 and T4 in the circulation
(Hillard et al. 1984; Nazar et al. 1977; Rosenkrantz and Esber 1980). High doses of a synthetic
CB receptor agonist inhibit T3 release without affecting TSH release, suggesting a site of action in
the thyroid gland (Porcella et al. 2002). On the other hand, studies in anterior pituitary explants
support an inhibitory effect of CB1 receptor activation on pituitary TSH release (Veiga et al.
2008). However, the majority of available evidence indicates a primary role for THC to inhibit
TRH release through effects in the hypothalamus or higher CNS regions (Deli et al. 2009; Hillard
et al. 1984). Glucocorticoid-induced mobilization of endocannabinoid signaling has been shown
to inhibit glutamate release onto TRH positive neurons in the PVN (Di et al. 2003), suggesting
that endocannabinoids could link stress and activation of the HPT axis.
10.4.3 Phytocannabinoids and regulation of growth hormone

Growth hormone (GH), also known as somatotropin, is a polypeptide that is synthesized and
released from somatotrophic cells in the anterior pituitary. GH is an anabolic hormone that stimulates growth and regulates energy homeostasis. GH secretion is regulated by the coordinated effects
of two hypothalamic peptides: somatostatin (inhibitory) and growth hormone-releasing hormone
(GHRH; stimulatory). The release of somatostatin and GHRH are regulated by biogenic amines,
metabolic status, sex hormones, and sleep. GH is released in a pulsatile manner, with the largest
GH peak occurring about an hour after the onset of sleep (Takahashi et al. 1968). Surges in GH
release occur during waking as well, with a frequency of approximately 3–5 h (Natelson et al. 1975).
There is only one study of the effects of phytocannabinoids in humans. Prolonged administration to human males of THC (more than 200 mg per day) decreased serum GH concentrations
evoked by insulin, which is the gold-standard test of GH axis integrity (Benowitz et al. 1976). The
effects of more moderate THC doses are unknown.
Preclinical studies have demonstrated that acute and chronic THC treatment of adult and
adolescent rodents decreases basal circulating GH concentrations (Dalterio et al. 1981, 1983;
Kokka and Garcia 1974). THC also suppresses episodic release of GH in unrestrained male rats
(Falkenstein and Holley 1992). The effect of THC is not affected by dexamethasone (Kokka and
Garcia 1974) or by castration (Dalterio et al. 1983), suggesting that it is not secondary to either
increased HPA axis activation or suppression of sex hormone release.
The effect of THC is mimicked by acute administration of very low doses of the synthetic CB1
receptor agonist, HU-210 (Martin-Calderon et al. 1998), suggesting a CB 1 receptor role in the
effects of THC. The suppressive effect of THC on GH occurs when THC is injected into the third
ventricle (Rettori et al. 1988) and incubation of median eminence fragments or the mediobasal

197

198

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

hypothalamus with THC at concentrations as low as 1 nM increases somatostatin release (Rettori
et al. 1990), leading to the hypothesis that the mechanism of THC is to increase somatostatin.
However, CB1 receptors are present on human GH secreting cells in the pituitary and CB1 receptor agonist treatment inhibits GH secretion from acromegaly-associated pituitary adenomas in
culture (Pagotto et al. 2001), although another study found no effect of THC on GH release from
isolated pituitary cells (Rettori et al. 1988).
Acute exposure of mice to 50 mg/kg of the nonpsychoactive phytocannabinoid, cannabinol
increased plasma GH concentrations in unstressed male mice (Dalterio et al. 1981). The mechanism for this effect is not known.
10.4.4 Phytocannabinoids and melatonin

Melatonin is synthesized in the pineal gland during the night and plays an important role in
the sleep wake cycle in mammals. Melatonin biosynthesis is controlled by norepinephrine (NE)
released from sympathetic fibers that innervate the gland. NE acts through both alpha and beta
receptors to increase cAMP and calcium concentrations, which regulate transcriptional and posttranslational activation of the penultimate enzyme of melatonin biosynthesis, arylalkylamine
N-acetyltransferase (AANAT).
A study of the effects of THC on melatonin secretion in man found that 10 mg of THC administered by smoking in mid-afternoon (when melatonin concentrations are low) produced a 30-fold
increase in melatonin concentrations 1 and 2 h later in eight of nine subjects (Lissoni et al. 1986).
Interestingly, the remaining subject had very high basal melatonin concentrations and THC
treatment reduced melatonin concentrations in this individual. Although untested, the increase
in melatonin concentrations several hours after cannabis use could contribute to the well-known
crash, or sleepiness, experienced after a bout of cannabis use.
This observation has not been well studied in preclinical models. There are multiple mechanisms by which CB1 receptor activity could regulate NE release in the pineal. Systemic administration of CB1 receptor agonists increase the firing rate (Muntoni et al. 2006) and c fos expression
(Oropeza et al. 2005; Patel and Hillard 2003) in midbrain noradrenergic neurons; and increase NE
synthesis (Moranta et al. 2009) and release (Oropeza et al. 2005) in terminal regions. Thus, THC
could increase melatonin release as a result of increased NE drive onto the pineal. On the other
hand, immunohistochemical evidence indicates that the CB1 receptor is expressed by NE terminals in the pineal gland (Koch et al. 2008). If the presynaptic CB1 receptor inhibits NE release
in the pineal as it does in other brain regions (Tzavara et al. 2003), then endocannabinoid-CB1
receptor signaling could also regulate melatonin release as a result of inhibition of the release of
NE in the pineal. It is tempting to speculate that the first mechanism is operative when NE drive
onto the pineal is low while the second becomes more important when NE drive is high. This
could explain the divergent effects of THC in the human study outlined earlier.
Incubation of primary cultures of rat pineal glands with micromolar concentrations of THC,
CBD, and CBN inhibits melatonin synthesis through direct inhibition of AANAT activity (Koch
et al. 2006). This effect of the phytocannabinoids is not CB receptor mediated; in fact the phytocannabinoids inhibit AANAT activity in cell free systems, suggesting a direct inhibition of the
enzyme (Koch et al. 2006).

10.5 Summary
The phytocannabinoid THC can exert bidirectional effects on anxiety and mood. Considerable
human and animal data support the hypothesis that THC-mediated activation of the CB1 receptor likely contributes to the reported antianxiety and antidepressant effects of cannabis. However,

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON ANXIETY, MOOD, AND THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

excessive cannabis use during adolescence can downregulate endocannabinoid/CB1 receptor function, which could predispose an individual to either anxiety disorders or depression. In support
of this hypothesis, treatment of humans with a CB1 receptor antagonist resulted in a significant
increase in indices of anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation in otherwise mentally healthy individuals (Hill and Gorzalka 2009b; Nissen et al. 2008). In addition, individuals with major depression exhibit reduced levels of endocannabinoids in their circulation (Hill et al. 2008, 2009c) and
circulating endocannabinoid concentrations are inversely related to anxiety measures (Hill et al.,
2008). Together, these findings suggest that compromised endocannabinoid signaling is sufficient
to increase risk for anxiety and depression in humans, and as such, the downregulation of endocannabinoid function following excessive cannabis use could be the bridge linking excessive cannabis
use with risk for these psychiatric disorders in humans.
While the effects of the phytocannabinoids on the HPA axis and reproductive hormones are
well described in human and preclinical studies, we know far less about the interactions of THC
and other phytocannabinoids with other endocrine systems. This is particularly striking for GH
and melatonin in light of earlier findings that these hormones are significantly altered by cannabis. Since GH and melatonin are both implicated in regulation of mood and altered by stress, an
untested hypothesis is that the endocannabinoids contribute to the link between these hormones
and mood.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to acknowledge the following for support during the writing of this chapter:
NIH grants R01 DA026996 (CJH), K08 MH090412 (SP) and the Canadian Institutes of HealthResearch Canada Research Chairs Program (MNH).

References
Ablon, S.L. and Goodwin, F.K. (1974). High frequency of dysphoric reactions to tetrahydrocannabinol
among depressed patients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 131, 448–453.
Amtmann, D., Weydt, P., Johnson, K.L., Jensen, M.P., and Carter, G.T. (2004). Survey of cannabis
use in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. American Journal of Hospice Palliative Care, 21,
95–104.
Ashton, C.H., Moore, P.B., Gallagher, P., and Young, A.H. (2005). Cannabinoids in bipolar affective
disorder: a review and discussion of their therapeutic potential. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 19,
293–300.
Bambico, F.R., Hattan, P.R., Garant, J.P., and Gobbi, G. (2012). Effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
on behavioral despair and on pre- and postsynaptic serotonergic transmission. Progress in NeuroPsychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 38, 88–96.
Bambico, F.R., Katz, N., Debonnel, G., and Gobbi, G. (2007). Cannabinoids elicit antidepressantlike behavior and activate serotonergic neurons through the medial prefrontal cortex. Journal of
Neuroscience, 27, 11700–11711.
Bambico, F.R., Nguyen, N.T., Katz, N., and Gobbi, G. (2010). Chronic exposure to cannabinoids during
adolescence but not during adulthood impairs emotional behaviour and monoaminergic neurotransmission. Neurobiology of Disease, 37, 641–655.
Banerjee, A., Poddar, M.K., Saha, S., and Ghosh, J.J. (1975). Effect of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on
monoamine oxidase activity of rat tissues in vivo. Biochemical Pharmacology, 24, 1435–1436.
Benowitz, N.L., Jones, R.T., and Lerner, C.B. (1976). Depression of growth hormone and cortisol response
to insulin-induced hypoglycemia after prolonged oral delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol administration in
man. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 42, 938–941.

199

200

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Bergamaschi, M.M., Queiroz, R.H., Chagas, M.H., et al. (2011). Cannabidiol reduces the anxiety induced
by simulated public speaking in treatment-naive social phobia patients. Neuropsychopharmacology, 36,
1219–1226.
Bernal, J. (2007). Thyroid hormone receptors in brain development and function. Nature Clinical Practice
Endocrinology & Metabolism, 3, 249–259.
Bialos, D.S. (1970). Adverse marijuana reactions: a critical examination of the literature with selected case
material. American Journal of Psychiatry, 127, 819–823.
Block, R.I., Farinpour, R., and Schlechte, J.A. (1991). Effects of chronic marijuana use on testosterone,
luteinizing hormone, follicle stimulating hormone, prolactin and cortisol in men and women. Drug and
Alcohol Dependence, 28, 121–128.
Bonn-Miller, M.O., Harris, A.H., and Trafton, J.A. (2012). Prevalence of cannabis use disorder diagnoses
among veterans in 2002, 2008, and 2009. Psychological Services, 9, 404–416.
Bonn-Miller, M.O., Vujanovic, A.A., and Drescher, K.D. (2011). Cannabis use among military veterans after
residential treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 25, 485–491.
Bonn-Miller, M.O., Zvolensky, M.J., Bernstein, A., and Stickle, T.R. (2008). Marijuana coping motives
interact with marijuana use frequency to predict anxious arousal, panic related catastrophic thinking,
and worry among current marijuana users. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 862–873.
Bonnet, U. (2013). Chronic cannabis abuse, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and thyroid function.
Pharmacopsychiatry, 46, 35–36.
Bovasso, G.B. (2001). Cannabis abuse as a risk factor for depressive symptoms. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 158, 2033–2037.
Buckner, J.D., Bonn-Miller, M.O., Zvolensky, M.J., and Schmidt, N.B. (2007). Marijuana use motives and
social anxiety among marijuana-using young adults. Addictive Behaviors, 32, 2238–2252.
Buckner, J.D., Schmidt, N.B., Lang, A.R., Small, J.W., Schlauch, R.C., and Lewinsohn, P.M. (2008).
Specificity of social anxiety disorder as a risk factor for alcohol and cannabis dependence. Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 42, 230–239.
Buckner, J.D., Zvolensky, M.J., and Schmidt, N.B. (2012). Cannabis-related impairment and social anxiety: the roles of gender and cannabis use motives. Addictive Behaviors, 37, 1294–1297.
Bujarski, S.J., Feldner, M.T., Lewis, S.F., et al. (2012a). Marijuana use among traumatic event-exposed
adolescents: posttraumatic stress symptom frequency predicts coping motivations for use. Addictive
Behaviors, 37, 53–59.
Bujarski, S.J., Norberg, M.M., and Copeland, J. (2012b). The association between distress tolerance and
cannabis use-related problems: the mediating and moderating roles of coping motives and gender.
Addictive Behaviors, 37, 1181–1184.
Calhoun, P.S., Sampson, W.S., Bosworth, H.B., et al. (2000). Drug use and validity of substance use selfreports in veterans seeking help for posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 68, 923–927.
Campos, A.C., Ortega, Z., Palazuelos, J., et al. (2013). The anxiolytic effect of cannabidiol on chronically
stressed mice depends on hippocampal neurogenesis: involvement of the endocannabinoid system.
International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 16, 1407–1419.
Chabrol, H., Duconge, E., Casas, C., Roura, C., and Carey, K.B. (2005). Relations between cannabis use
and dependence, motives for cannabis use and anxious, depressive and borderline symptomatology.
Addictive Behaviors, 30, 829–840.
Chen, C.Y., Wagner, F.A., and Anthony, J.C. (2002). Marijuana use and the risk of major depressive episode. Epidemiological evidence from the United States National Comorbidity Survey. Social Psychiatry
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 37, 199–206.
Chhatwal, J.P., Gutman, A.R., Maguschak, K.A., et al. (2009). Functional interactions between
endocannabinoid and CCK neurotransmitter systems may be critical for extinction learning.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 34, 509–521.

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON ANXIETY, MOOD, AND THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

Cone, E.J., Johnson, R.E., Moore, J.D., and Roache, J.D. (1986). Acute effects of smoking marijuana on
hormones, subjective effects and performance in male human subjects. Pharmacology Biochemistry and
Behavior, 24, 1749–1754.
Cornelius, J.R., Kirisci, L., Reynolds, M., Clark, D.B., Hayes, J., and Tarter, R. (2010). PTSD contributes
to teen and young adult cannabis use disorders. Addictive Behaviors, 35, 91–94.
Cougle, J.R., Bonn-Miller, M.O., Vujanovic, A.A., Zvolensky, M.J., and Hawkins, K.A. (2011).
Posttraumatic stress disorder and cannabis use in a nationally representative sample. Psychology of
Addictive Behaviors, 25, 554–558.
Crippa, J.A., Derenusson, G.N., Ferrari, T.B., et al. (2011). Neural basis of anxiolytic effects of cannabidiol
(CBD) in generalized social anxiety disorder: a preliminary report. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 25,
121–130.
Crippa, J.A., Zuardi, A.W., Martin-Santos, R., et al. (2009). Cannabis and anxiety: a critical review of the
evidence. Human Psychopharmacology, 24, 515–523.
D'Souza, D.C., Perry, E., MacDougall, L., et al. (2004). The psychotomimetic effects of intravenous delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in healthy individuals: implications for psychosis. Neuropsychopharmacology,
29, 1558–1572.
D’Souza, D.C., Ranganathan, M., Braley, G., et al. (2008). Blunted psychotomimetic and amnestic effects
of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in frequent users of cannabis. Neuropsychopharmacology, 33, 2505–
2516.
Dalterio, S.L., Mayfield, D.L., Michael, S.D., Macmillan, B.T., and Bartke, A. (1983). Effects of
delta 9-THC and castration on behavior and plasma hormone levels in male mice. Pharmacology
Biochemistry and Behavior, 18, 81–86.
Dalterio, S.L., Michael, S.D., Macmillan, B.T., and Bartke, A. (1981). Differential effects of cannabinoid
exposure and stress on plasma prolactin, growth hormone and corticosterone levels in male mice. Life
Sciences, 28, 761–766.
Dannon, P.N., Lowengrub, K., Amiaz, R., Grunhaus, L., and Kotler, M. (2004). Comorbid cannabis use
and panic disorder: short term and long term follow-up study. Human Psychopharmacology, 19, 97–101.
Das, R.K., Kamboj, S.K., Ramadas, M., et al. (2013). Cannabidiol enhances consolidation of explicit fear
extinction in humans. Psychopharmacology, 226, 781–792.
de Bitencourt, R.M., Pamplona, F.A., and Takahashi, R.N. (2013). A current overview of cannabinoids
and glucocorticoids in facilitating extinction of aversive memories: potential extinction enhancers.
Neuropharmacology, 64, 389–395.
Deas, D., Gerding, L., and Hazy, J. (2000). Marijuana and panic disorder. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 39, 1467.
Degenhardt, L., Hall, W., and Lynskey, M. (2003). Exploring the association between cannabis use and
depression. Addiction, 98, 1493–1504.
Deli, L., Wittmann, G., Kallo, I., et al. (2009). Type 1 cannabinoid receptor-containing axons innervate
hypophysiotropic thyrotropin-releasing hormone-synthesizing neurons. Endocrinology, 150, 98–103.
Denson, T.F. and Earleywine, M. (2006). Decreased depression in marijuana users. Addictive Behaviors, 31,
738–742.
Di, S., Malcher-Lopes, R., Halmos, K.C., and Tasker, J.G. (2003). Nongenomic glucocorticoid inhibition
via endocannabinoid release in the hypothalamus: a fast feedback mechanism. Journal of Neuroscience,
23, 4850–4857.
Egashira, N., Matsuda, T., Koushi, E., et al. (2008). Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol prolongs the immobility time in the mouse forced swim test: Involvement of cannabinoid CB(1) receptor and serotonergic
system. European Journal of Pharmacology, 589, 117–121.
El-Alfy, A.T., Ivey, K., Robinson, K., et al. (2010). Antidepressant-like effect of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol
and other cannabinoids isolated from Cannabis sativa L. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 95,
434–442.

201

202

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Elbatsh, M.M., Moklas, M.A., Marsden, C.A., and Kendall, D.A. (2012). Antidepressant-like effects of
Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and rimonabant in the olfactory bulbectomised rat model of depression.
Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 102, 357–365.
Evanson, N.K., Tasker, J.G., Hill, M.N., Hillard, C.J., and Herman, J.P. (2010). Fast feedback inhibition
of the HPA axis by glucocorticoids is mediated by endocannabinoid signaling. Endocrinology, 151,
4811–4819.
Fairman, B.J. and Anthony, J.C. (2012). Are early-onset cannabis smokers at an increased risk of depression spells? Journal of Affective Disorders, 138, 54–62.
Falkenstein, B.A. and Holley, D.C. (1992). Effect of acute intravenous administration of delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol on the episodic secretion of immunoassayable growth hormone in the rat. Life
Sciences, 50, 1109–1116.
Fisar, Z. (2010). Inhibition of monoamine oxidase activity by cannabinoids. Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s
Archives of Pharmacology, 381, 563–572.
Flamant, F., Gauthier, K., and Samarut, J. (2007). Thyroid hormones signaling is getting more complex:
STORMs are coming. Molecular Endocrinology, 21, 321–333.
Fox, C.L., Towe, S.L., Stephens, R.S., Walker, D.D., and Roffman, R.A. (2011). Motives for cannabis use
in high-risk adolescent users. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 25, 492–500.
Fraser, G.A. (2009). The use of a synthetic cannabinoid in the management of treatment-resistant nightmares in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics, 15, 84–88.
Ganon-Elazar, E. and Akirav, I. (2009). Cannabinoid receptor activation in the basolateral amygdala blocks
the effects of stress on the conditioning and extinction of inhibitory avoidance. Journal of Neuroscience,
29, 11078–10788.
Gomes, F.V., Resstel, L.B., and Guimaraes, F.S. (2011). The anxiolytic-like effects of cannabidiol injected
into the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis are mediated by 5-HT1A receptors. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin), 213, 465–473.
Gorzalka, B.B. and Hill, M.N. (2011). Putative role of endocannabinoid signaling in the etiology of depression and actions of antidepressants. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 35,
1575–1585.
Green, B.E. and Ritter, C. (2000). Marijuana use and depression. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 41,
40–49.
Gruber, A.J., Pope, H.G., Jr., and Brown, M.E. (1996). Do patients use marijuana as an antidepressant?
Depression, 4, 77–80.
Gunduz-Cinar, O., Macpherson, K.P., Cinar, R., et al. (2013). Convergent translational evidence of a role
for anandamide in amygdala-mediated fear extinction, threat processing and stress-reactivity. Molecular
Psychiatry, 18, 813–823.
Halikas, J.A., Goodwin, D.W., and Guze, S.B. (1971). Marihuana effects. A survey of regular users. JAMA,
217, 692–694.
Harder, V.S., Morral, A.R., and Arkes, J. (2006). Marijuana use and depression among adults: Testing for
causal associations. Addiction, 101, 1463–1472.
Haring, M., Grieb, M., Monory, K., Lutz, B., and Moreira, F.A. (2013). Cannabinoid CB(1) receptor in
the modulation of stress coping behavior in mice: the role of serotonin and different forebrain neuronal
subpopulations. Neuropharmacology, 65, 83–89.
Hayatbakhsh, M.R., Najman, J.M., Jamrozik, K., Mamun, A.A., Alati, R., and Bor, W. (2007). Cannabis
and anxiety and depression in young adults: a large prospective study. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 408–417.
Hayatbakhsh, R., Williams, G.M., Bor, W., and Najman, J.M. (2013). Early childhood predictors
of age of initiation to use of cannabis: a birth prospective study. Drug and Alcohol Review, 32,
232–240.

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON ANXIETY, MOOD, AND THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

Heim, C. and Nemeroff, C.B. (2001). The role of childhood trauma in the neurobiology of mood and anxiety disorders: preclinical and clinical studies. Biological Psychiatry, 49, 1023–1039.
Hill, M.N. and Gorzalka, B.B. (2004). Enhancement of anxiety-like responsiveness to the cannabinoid
CB(1) receptor agonist HU-210 following chronic stress. European Journal of Pharmacology, 499,
291–295.
Hill, M.N. and Gorzalka, B.B. (2006). Increased sensitivity to restraint stress and novelty-induced emotionality following long-term, high dose cannabinoid exposure. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 31, 526–536.
Hill, M.N. and Gorzalka, B.B. (2009a). The endocannabinoid system and the treatment of mood and anxiety disorders. CNS & Neurological Disorders Drug Targets, 8, 451–458.
Hill, M.N. and Gorzalka, B.B. (2009b). Impairments in endocannabinoid signaling and depressive illness.
JAMA, 301, 1165–1166.
Hill, M.N., Hillard, C.J., Bambico, F.R., Patel, S., Gorzalka, B.B., and Gobbi, G. (2009a). The therapeutic
potential of the endocannabinoid system for the development of a novel class of antidepressants. Trends
in Pharmacological Sciences, 30, 484–493.
Hill, M.N., Karatsoreos, I.N., Hillard, C.J., and McEwen, B.S. (2010). Rapid elevations in limbic endocannabinoid content by glucocorticoid hormones in vivo. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 35, 1333–1338.
Hill, M.N., McLaughlin, R.J., Morrish, A.C., et al. (2009b). Suppression of amygdalar endocannabinoid signaling by stress contributes to activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 34, 2733–2745.
Hill, M.N., Miller, G.E., Carrier, E.J., Gorzalka, B.B., and Hillard, C.J. (2009c). Circulating endocannabinoids and N-acyl ethanolamines are differentially regulated in major depression and following exposure
to social stress. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 34, 1257–1262.
Hill, M.N., Miller, G.E., Ho, W.S., Gorzalka, B.B., and Hillard, C.J. (2008). Serum endocannabinoid content is altered in females with depressive disorders: a preliminary report. Pharmacopsychiatry, 41, 48–53.
Hillard, C.J., Farber, N.E., Hagen, T.C., and Bloom, A.S. (1984). The effects of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol
on serum thyrotropin levels in the rat. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 20, 547–550.
Holsboer, F. (2000). The corticosteroid receptor hypothesis of depression. Neuropsychopharmacology, 23,
477–501.
Huizink, A.C. and Mulder, E.J. (2006). Maternal smoking, drinking or cannabis use during pregnancy and
neurobehavioral and cognitive functioning in human offspring. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
30, 24–41.
Hyman, S.M. and Sinha, R. (2009). Stress-related factors in cannabis use and misuse: implications for prevention and treatment. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 36, 400–413.
Joffe, R.T. (2011). Hormone treatment of depression. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 13, 127–138.
Kaplan, H.B., Martin, S.S., Johnson, R.J., and Robbins, C.A. (1986). Escalation of marijuana use: application of a general theory of deviant behavior. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 27, 44–61.
Karschner, E.L., Darwin, W.D., McMahon, R.P., et al. (2011). Subjective and physiological effects after
controlled Sativex and oral THC administration. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 89, 400–407.
Kathuria, S., Gaetani, S., Fegley, D., et al. (2003). Modulation of anxiety through blockade of anandamide
hydrolysis. Nature Medicine, 9, 76–81.
Khare, M., Taylor, A.H., Konje, J.C., and Bell, S.C. (2006). Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol inhibits cytotrophoblast cell proliferation and modulates gene transcription. Molecular Human Reproduction, 12,
321–333.
King, G.R., Ernst, T., Deng, W., et al. (2011). Altered brain activation during visuomotor integration in
chronic active cannabis users: relationship to cortisol levels. Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 17923–17931.
Kinsey, S.G., O’Neal, S.T., Long, J.Z., Cravatt, B.F., and Lichtman, A.H. (2011). Inhibition of endocannabinoid catabolic enzymes elicits anxiolytic-like effects in the marble burying assay. Pharmacology
Biochemistry and Behavior, 98, 21–27.

203

204

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Kleinloog, D., Liem-Moolenaar, M., Jacobs, G., et al. (2012). Does olanzapine inhibit the psychomimetic
effects of Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol? Journal of Psychopharmacology, 26, 1307–1316.
Klumpers, L.E., Cole, D.M., Khalili-Mahani, N., et al. (2012). Manipulating brain connectivity with
delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol: a pharmacological resting state FMRI study. Neuroimage, 63,
1701–1711.
Koch, M., Dehghani, F., Habazettl, I., Schomerus, C., and Korf, H.W. (2006). Cannabinoids attenuate
norepinephrine-induced melatonin biosynthesis in the rat pineal gland by reducing arylalkylamine
N-acetyltransferase activity without involvement of cannabinoid receptors. Journal of Neurochemistry,
98, 267–278.
Koch, M., Habazettl, I., Dehghani, F., and Korf, H.W. (2008). The rat pineal gland comprises an endocannabinoid system. Journal of Pineal Research, 45, 351–360.
Kokka, N. and Garcia, J.F. (1974). Effects of delta 9-THC on growth hormone and ACTH secretion in rats.
Life Sciences, 15, 329–338.
Kotin, J., Post, R.M., and Goodwin, F.K. (1973). Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in depressed patients.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 28, 345–348.
Lahat, A., Lang, A., and Ben-Horin, S. (2012). Impact of cannabis treatment on the quality of life, weight
and clinical disease activity in inflammatory bowel disease patients: a pilot prospective study. Digestion,
85, 1–8.
Langs, G., Fabisch, H., Fabisch, K., and Zapotoczky, H. (1997). Can cannabis trigger recurrent panic
attacks in susceptible patients? European Psychiatry, 12, 415–419.
Lin, H.C., Mao, S.C., Su, C.L., and Gean, P.W. (2009). The role of prefrontal cortex CB1 receptors in the
modulation of fear memory. Cerebral Cortex, 19, 165–175.
Lissoni, P., Resentini, M., Mauri, R., et al. (1986). Effects of tetrahydrocannabinol on melatonin secretion
in man. Hormone and Metabolic Research, 18, 77–78.
Lutz, B. (2007). The endocannabinoid system and extinction learning. Molecular Neurobiology, 36, 92–101.
Lynskey, M.T., Glowinski, A.L., Todorov, A.A., et al. (2004). Major depressive disorder, suicidal ideation,
and suicide attempt in twins discordant for cannabis dependence and early-onset cannabis use. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 61, 1026–1032.
Marsicano, G., Wotjak, C.T., Azad, S.C., et al. (2002). The endogenous cannabinoid system controls
extinction of aversive memories. Nature, 418, 530–534.
Martin-Calderon, J.L., Munoz, R.M., Villanua, M.A., et al. (1998). Characterization of the acute endocrine
actions of (-)-11-hydroxy-delta8-tetrahydrocannabinol-dimethylheptyl (HU-210), a potent synthetic
cannabinoid in rats. European Journal of Pharmacology, 344, 77–86.
Martin-Santos, R., Crippa, J.A., Batalla, A., et al. (2012). Acute effects of a single, oral dose of Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) administration in healthy volunteers. Current
Pharmaceutical Design, 18, 4966–4979.
McLaughlin, R.J., Hill, M.N., Bambico, F.R., et al. (2012). Prefrontal cortical anandamide signaling coordinates coping responses to stress through a serotonergic pathway. European Neuropsychopharmacology,
22, 664–671.
McLaughlin, R.J., Hill, M.N., and Gorzalka, B.B. (2009). Monoaminergic neurotransmission contributes
to cannabinoid-induced activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. European Journal of
Pharmacology, 624, 71–76.
Mechoulam, R., Parker, L.A., and Gallily, R. (2002). Cannabidiol: an overview of some pharmacological
aspects. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 42, 11S–19S.
Moranta, D., Esteban, S., and Garcia-Sevilla, J.A. (2009). Chronic treatment and withdrawal of the cannabinoid agonist WIN 55,212-2 modulate the sensitivity of presynaptic receptors involved in the regulation of monoamine syntheses in rat brain. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol, 379, 61–72.
Moreira, F.A. and Wotjak, C.T. (2010). Cannabinoids and anxiety. Current Topics in Behavioral
Neurosciences, 2, 429–450.

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON ANXIETY, MOOD, AND THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

Muntoni, A.L., Pillolla, G., Melis, M., Perra, S., Gessa, G.L., and Pistis, M. (2006). Cannabinoids modulate spontaneous neuronal activity and evoked inhibition of locus coeruleus noradrenergic neurons.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 2385–2394.
Natelson, B.H., Holaday, J., Meyerhoff, J., and Stokes, P.E. (1975). Temporal changes in growth hormone,
cortisol, and glucose: relation to light onset and behavior. American Journal of Physiology, 229, 409–415.
Nazar, B., Kairys, D.J., Fowler, R., and Harclerode, J. (1977). Effects of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on
serum thyroxine concentrations in the rat. Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics, 29,
778–779.
Neumeister, A. (2013). The endocannabinoid system provides an avenue for evidence-based treatment
development for PTSD. Depression and Anxiety, 30, 93–96.
Nissen, S.E., Nicholls, S.J., Wolski, K., et al. (2008). Effect of rimonabant on progression of atherosclerosis
in patients with abdominal obesity and coronary artery disease: the STRADIVARIUS randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 299, 1547–1560.
Ohara, N., Tsujino, T., and Maruo, T. (2004). The role of thyroid hormone in trophoblast function, early
pregnancy maintenance, and fetal neurodevelopment. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Canada,
26, 982–990.
Oropeza, V.C., Page, M.E., and Van Bockstaele, E.J. (2005). Systemic administration of WIN 55,212-2
increases norepinephrine release in the rat frontal cortex. Brain Research, 1046, 45–54.
Page, S.A., Verhoef, M.J., Stebbins, R.A., Metz, L.M., and Levy, J.C. (2003). Cannabis use as described by
people with multiple sclerosis. Canadian Journal of Neurological Sciences, 30, 201–205.
Pagotto, U., Marsicano, G., Fezza, F., et al. (2001). Normal human pituitary gland and pituitary adenomas express cannabinoid receptor type 1 and synthesize endogenous cannabinoids: first evidence for
a direct role of cannabinoids on hormone modulation at the human pituitary level. Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 86, 2687–2696.
Pamplona, F.A., Bitencourt, R.M., and Takahashi, R.N. (2008). Short- and long-term effects of cannabinoids on the extinction of contextual fear memory in rats. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 90,
290–293.
Passie, T., Emrich, H.M., Karst, M., Brandt, S.D., and Halpern, J.H. (2012). Mitigation of post-traumatic
stress symptoms by Cannabis resin: a review of the clinical and neurobiological evidence. Drug Testing
and Analysis, 4, 649–659.
Patel, S., Cravatt, B.F., and Hillard, C.J. (2005). Synergistic interactions between cannabinoids and environmental stress in the activation of the central amygdala. Neuropsychopharmacology, 30, 497–507.
Patel, S. and Hillard, C.J. (2003). Cannabinoid-induced Fos expression within A10 dopaminergic neurons.
Brain Research, 963, 15–25.
Patel, S. and Hillard, C.J. (2006). Pharmacological evaluation of cannabinoid receptor ligands in a mouse
model of anxiety: further evidence for an anxiolytic role for endogenous cannabinoid signaling. Journal
of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 318, 304–311.
Patel, S., Roelke, C.T., Rademacher, D.J., Cullinan, W.E., and Hillard, C.J. (2004). Endocannabinoid
signaling negatively modulates stress-induced activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.
Endocrinology, 145, 5431–5438.
Patton, G.C., Coffey, C., Carlin, J.B., Degenhardt, L., Lynskey, M., and Hall, W. (2002). Cannabis use and
mental health in young people: cohort study. BMJ, 325, 1195–1198.
Porcella, A., Marchese, G., Casu, M.A., et al. (2002). Evidence for functional CB1 cannabinoid receptor
expressed in the rat thyroid. European Journal of Endocrinology, 147, 255–261.
Potter, C.M., Vujanovic, A.A., Marshall-Berenz, E.C., Bernstein, A., and Bonn-Miller, M.O. (2011).
Posttraumatic stress and marijuana use coping motives: the mediating role of distress tolerance. Journal
of Anxiety Disorders, 25, 437–443.
Ranganathan, M., Braley, G., Pittman, B., et al. (2009). The effects of cannabinoids on serum cortisol and
prolactin in humans. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 203, 737–744.

205

206

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Realini, N., Vigano, D., Guidali, C., Zamberletti, E., Rubino, T., and Parolaro, D. (2011). Chronic
URB597 treatment at adulthood reverted most depressive-like symptoms induced by adolescent exposure to THC in female rats. Neuropharmacology, 60, 235–243.
Reilly, D., Didcott, P., Swift, W., and Hall, W. (1998). Long-term cannabis use: characteristics of users in
an Australian rural area. Addiction, 93, 837–846.
Rettori, V., Aguila, M.C., Gimeno, M.F., Franchi, A.M., and McCann, S.M. (1990). In vitro effect of delta
9-tetrahydrocannabinol to stimulate somatostatin release and block that of luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone by suppression of the release of prostaglandin E2. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 87, 10063–10066.
Rettori, V., Wenger, T., Snyder, G., Dalterio, S., and McCann, S.M. (1988). Hypothalamic action of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol to inhibit the release of prolactin and growth hormone in the rat.
Neuroendocrinology, 47, 498–503.
Rey, A.A., Purrio, M., Viveros, M.P., and Lutz, B. (2012). Biphasic effects of cannabinoids in anxiety
responses: CB1 and GABA(B) receptors in the balance of GABAergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission. Neuropsychopharmacology, 37, 2624–2634.
Rosenkrantz, H. and Esber, H.J. (1980). Cannabinoid-induced hormone changes in monkeys and rats.
Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, 6, 297–313.
Rubino, T., Guidali, C., Vigano, D., et al. (2008). CB1 receptor stimulation in specific brain areas differently modulate anxiety-related behaviour. Neuropharmacology, 54, 151–160.
Rubino, T., Realini, N., Braida, D., et al. (2009). The depressive phenotype induced in adult female rats by
adolescent exposure to THC is associated with cognitive impairment and altered neuroplasticity in the
prefrontal cortex. Neurotoxicity Research, 15, 291–302.
Ruehle, S., Rey, A.A., Remmers, F., and Lutz, B. (2012). The endocannabinoid system in anxiety, fear
memory and habituation. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 26, 23–39.
Rush, A.J., Giles, D.E., Schlesser, M.A., et al. (1996). The dexamethasone suppression test in patients with
mood disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 57, 470–484.
Russo, E.B. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage
effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1344–1364.
Saber-Tehrani, A., Naderi, N., Hosseini Najarkolaei, A., Haghparast, A., and Motamedi, F. (2010).
Cannabinoids and their interactions with diazepam on modulation of serum corticosterone concentration in male mice. Neurochemical Research, 35, 60–66.
Sano, K., Koushi, E., Irie, K., et al. (2009). Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol enhances an increase of plasma
corticosterone levels induced by forced swim-stress. Biological & Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 32, 2065–
2067.
Sciolino, N.R., Zhou, W., and Hohmann, A.G. (2011). Enhancement of endocannabinoid signaling with
JZL184, an inhibitor of the 2-arachidonoylglycerol hydrolyzing enzyme monoacylglycerol lipase, produces anxiolytic effects under conditions of high environmental aversiveness in rats. Pharmacology
Research, 64, 226–234.
Shearman, L.P., Rosko, K.M., Fleischer, R., et al. (2003). Antidepressant-like and anorectic effects of the
cannabinoid CB1 receptor inverse agonist AM251 in mice. Behavioural Pharmacology, 14, 573–582.
Somaini, L., Manfredini, M., Amore, M., et al. (2012). Psychobiological responses to unpleasant emotions
in cannabis users. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 262, 47–57.
Steiner, M.A. and Wotjak, C.T. (2008). Role of the endocannabinoid system in regulation of the hypothalamicpituitary-adrenocortical axis. Progress in Brain Research, 170, 397–432.
Sumislawski, J.J., Ramikie, T.S., and Patel, S. (2011). Reversible gating of endocannabinoid plasticity in the
amygdala by chronic stress: a potential role for monoacylglycerol lipase inhibition in the prevention of
stress-induced behavioral adaptation. Neuropsychopharmacology, 36, 2750–2761.
Takahashi, Y., Kipnis, D.M., and Daughaday, W.H. (1968). Growth hormone secretion during sleep.
Journal of Clinical Investigation, 47, 2079–20790.

EFFECTS OF PHYTOCANNABINOIDS ON ANXIETY, MOOD, AND THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

Thomas, H. (1993). Psychiatric symptoms in cannabis users. British Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 141–149.
Thomas, H. (1996). A community survey of adverse effects of cannabis use. Drug and Alcohol Dependence,
42, 201–207.
Tzavara, E.T., Davis, R.J., Perry, K.W., et al. (2003). The CB1 receptor antagonist SR141716A selectively
increases monoaminergic neurotransmission in the medial prefrontal cortex: implications for therapeutic actions. British Journal of Pharmacology, 138, 544–553.
Uribe-Marino, A., Francisco, A., Castiblanco-Urbina, M.A., et al. (2012). Anti-aversive effects of cannabidiol on innate fear-induced behaviors evoked by an ethological model of panic attacks based on a
prey vs the wild snake Epicrates cenchria crassus confrontation paradigm. Neuropsychopharmacology, 37,
412–421.
Van Dam, N.T., Bedi, G., and Earleywine, M. (2012). Characteristics of clinically anxious versus nonanxious regular, heavy marijuana users. Addictive Behaviors, 37, 1217–1223.
van Leeuwen, A.P., Verhulst, F.C., Reijneveld, S.A., Vollebergh, W.A., Ormel, J., and Huizink, A.C.
(2011). Can the gateway hypothesis, the common liability model and/or, the route of administration
model predict initiation of cannabis use during adolescence? A survival analysis – the TRAILS study.
Journal of Adolescent Health, 48, 73–78.
Veiga, M., Bloise, F., Costa, E.S.R., et al. (2008). Acute effects of endocannabinoid anandamide and CB1
receptor antagonist, AM251 in the regulation of thyrotropin secretion. Journal of Endocrinology, 199,
235–242.
Ware, M.A., Adams, H., and Guy, G.W. (2005). The medicinal use of cannabis in the UK: results of a
nationwide survey. International Journal of Clinical Practice, 59, 291–295.
Williamson, E.M. and Evans, F.J. (2000). Cannabinoids in clinical practice. Drugs, 60, 1303–1314.
Woolridge, E., Barton, S., Samuel, J., Osorio, J., Dougherty, A., and Holdcroft, A. (2005). Cannabis use in
HIV for pain and other medical symptoms. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 29, 358–367.
Zanelati, T.V., Biojone, C., Moreira, F.A., Guimaraes, F.S., and Joca, S.R. (2010). Antidepressantlike effects of cannabidiol in mice: possible involvement of 5-HT1A receptors. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 159, 122–128.
Zuardi, A.W., Guimaraes, F.S., and Moreira, A.C. (1993). Effect of cannabidiol on plasma prolactin,
growth hormone and cortisol in human volunteers. Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research,
26, 213–217.
Zuardi, A.W., Shirakawa, I., Finkelfarb, E., and Karniol, I.G. (1982). Action of cannabidiol on the anxiety and other effects produced by delta 9-THC in normal subjects. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 76,
245–250.
Zuardi, A.W., Teixeira, N.A., and Karniol, I.C. (1984). Pharmacological interaction of the effects of delta
9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol on serum corticosterone levels in rats. Archives internationales de pharmacodynamie et de thérapie, 269, 12–19.
Zuckerman, B., Frank, D.A., Hingson, R., et al. (1989). Effects of maternal marijuana and cocaine use on
fetal growth. New England Journal of Medicine, 320, 762–768.
Zvolensky, M.J., Bernstein, A., Sachs-Ericsson, N., Schmidt, N.B., Buckner, J.D., and Bonn-Miller, M.O.
(2006). Lifetime associations between cannabis, use, abuse, and dependence and panic attacks in a representative sample. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 40, 477–486.
Zvolensky, M.J., Lewinsohn, P., Bernstein, A., et al. (2008). Prospective associations between cannabis use,
abuse, and dependence and panic attacks and disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 42, 1017–1023.

207

Chapter 11

Phytocannabinoids
and the Cardiovascular System
Saoirse E. O’Sullivan

11.1 Introduction
The plethora of ailments for which cannabis was taken historically included atherosclerosis,
cardiac palpitations, and hypertension (see Lambert 2001; Zuardi 2006), implying actions on the
cardiovascular system, which have been investigated scientifically since the 1970s. Most studies have investigated the effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) or cannabis/marijuana
smoking, and few studies have documented the cardiovascular effects of some of the lesser known
phytocannabinoids. In vivo studies revealed a complex response to THC/cannabis, dependent
on whether the studies were carried out under anesthesia, and in what species. Later studies
looked at the direct effects of phytocannabinoids, primarily THC, on isolated preparations of the
heart, whole vascular beds, and individual arteries, again revealing complex actions of phytocannabinoids in the vasculature. In Chapter 11, the effects of phytocannabinoids under these various
experimental conditions will be discussed and summarized. This chapter will conclude with an
overall summary and identification of gaps in our current knowledge in this area.

11.2 Acute in vivo cardiovascular responses

to phytocannabinoids
11.2.1 In vivo responses to THC in anesthetized animals

Early studies examined the hemodynamic response (the forces involved in the circulation of
blood) to THC in anesthetized animals. In anesthetized dogs, THC (2.5 mg/kg, intravenously
(i.v.)) causes a decrease in heart rate (bradycardia), blood pressure, and peripheral vascular
resistance 15–30 min post administration (Jandhyala et al. 1976). A similar response was seen
in anesthetized rats, where administration of THC (up to 30 mg/kg, i.v.) caused an initial pressor (increase in blood pressure) effect (<1 min) followed by a depressor (decrease in blood
pressure) effect accompanied by bradycardia (Adams et al. 1976). Estrada et al. (1987) also
reported a bradycardic and depressor response to THC (up to 5 mg/kg, i.v.) in anesthetized
rats. Siqueira et al. (1979) found a more complex triphasic response to THC (2–10 mg/kg, i.v.)
with an immediate and short-lived decrease in blood pressure, a brief hypertensive response,
and then a longer-lasting hypotensive response. Bradycardic and depressor responses to i.v.
administration of THC have also been observed in anesthetized cats (1 mg/kg, i.v.) (Innemee
et al. 1979) and anesthetized pregnant sheep (1 mg/kg, pulmonary artery infusion) (Cotterill
et al. 1984).

Phytocannabinoids and the Cardiovascular System

11.2.1.1 Mechanism of action

The bradycardic response to THC is reported to be due to changes in the autonomic nervous
system. Cavero et al. (1973) showed that blockade of either parasympathetic or sympathetic activity to the heart partially prevented the bradycardia induced by THC in anesthetized dogs (up to
5 mg/kg, i.v), and that blockade of both pathways completely abolished the bradycardic effects
of THC. When the hearts of anesthetized dogs were paced to eliminate the effects of bradycardia, the reduction in blood pressure and total peripheral resistance were not altered (Jandhyala
et al. 1976). This suggests that the effect of THC on blood pressure is not solely due to changes in
heart rate. However, Siqueira et al. (1979) found the immediate fall in blood pressure was due to
bradycardia and was vagally mediated, while the long-lasting hypotensive response to THC was
due to inhibition of the sympathetic nervous system, as evidenced by its inhibition by pithing,
sympathetic ganglion blockade, and alpha adrenergic inhibition. Under anesthesia, other cannabinoids have been shown to inhibit norepinephrine release from postganglionic sympathetic axons
(Niederhoffer and Szabo 1999; Varga et al. 1996). Together, this suggests that the blood pressure
response to THC in anesthetized animals has an early vagal component related to the fall in heart
rate, and a longer-lasting component related to inhibition of the sympathetic nervous system.
Other mechanisms of action may also contribute to the hemodynamic responses to THC.
Burstein and colleagues (1982) showed that aspirin, a cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitor, significantly reduced the hypotensive effect of THC (0.45 mg/kg, i.v.), and also to a lesser extent the
reduction in heart rate. More recently, it was shown that the bradycardic and depressor effect of
THC (0.2 mg/kg, i.v.) in anesthetized rats is inhibited by systemic or hindbrain administration of
a COX inhibitor (Krowicki 2012). These studies suggest that vasoactive prostaglandins produced
by THC may play a role in in vivo responses. The production of vasoactive prostaglandins is a
mechanism of action also proposed for some of the direct actions of THC in isolated vascular
preparations (see section 11.5.1).
In 1997, Lake et al. showed that THC (4 mg/kg, i.v.) in anesthetized rats causes a brief pressor response followed by hypotension and bradycardia. These hemodynamic responses to THC,
except the brief pressor response, were all inhibited by a CB1 receptor antagonist. Although earlier
studies didn’t have the pharmacological tools to assess a potential role for cannabinoid receptors,
it might be assumed that the universally observed bradycardic and depressor response to THC in
anesthetized animals might also be CB1 mediated.
11.2.1.2 The effects of THC on regional blood flow in anesthetized animals

Observations that cannabis smoking might have beneficial effects in glaucoma led several investigators to look at the effects of THC on intraocular blood pressure. In anesthetized rabbits, i.v.
THC increased total eye blood flow by about 12% (Green et al. 1978). THC (up to 1 mg/kg, i.v.)
also decreased intraocular pressure in anesthetized cats (Innemee et al. 1979). Other vascular
beds/arteries that have increased blood flow after THC administration in anesthetized animals
include the pulmonary artery (Jandhyala et al. 1976) and umbilical artery (Cotterill et al. 1984).
However, interarterial administration of THC also causes increased perfusion pressure of the
hindquarters in an anesthetized rat (Adams et al. 1976; see also section 11.5.3).
11.2.2 In vivo responses to THC in conscious animals and man

In anesthetized animals, a depressor and bradycardic response to THC is consistently seen
across species. However, in the conscious animal, a different response is observed. Jandhyala and
Buckley (1977) showed various anesthetic agents have a significant effect on the cardiovascular

209

210

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

response to THC. In conscious dogs, THC (1 mg/kg, i.v.) caused a slight decrease in heart rate,
which was potentiated by pentobarbital or urethane anesthesia. Under morphine and chloralose
anesthesia, THC caused tachycardia (increase in heart rate), which could be inhibited by vagotomy, methylatropine (inhibits muscarinic acetylcholine receptors), or propranolol (nonselective
beta adrenergic receptor blocker), suggesting sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system
involvement. In conscious dogs, THC did not affect blood pressure, but caused a depressor effect
in those animals anesthetized with either pentobarbital, urethane, or chloralose. Jandhyala and
Hamed (1978) also showed the hypotensive effect of THC was detectable in anesthetized but not
conscious dogs.
In conscious, freely moving Spague Dawley rats, i.v. administration of THC (1 mg/kg) causes
an acute (over 60 min) decrease in heart rate and an increase in blood pressure. This was accompanied by vasoconstriction in the renal and mesenteric vascular beds, and vasodilation of the
hindquarters (O’Sullivan et al. 2007). Both the pressor and regional vascular (but not heart rate)
responses to THC were inhibited by a CB1 receptor antagonist. A similar hemodynamic response
has been observed to other cannabinoids in conscious rats, which could be blocked by CB1
antagonism and neurohumoral blockade and is likely to be due to sympathoexcitation (Gardiner
et al. 2001). To this end, Niederhoffer and Szabo (2000) showed in conscious rabbits that centrally administered CB1 agonists increase blood pressure, sympathetic nerve activity, and plasma
norepinephrine. Since the depressor effects of THC in anesthetized animals appears to be due to
CB1-mediated sympathetic inhibition, the sympathoexcitatory versus inhibitory effects of THC
(resulting in a pressor versus depressor response) may be due to the basal level of sympathetic
activity at the time of administration, which is known to be reduced in anesthesia. Alternatively,
the central effects of THC on the cardiovascular system may be susceptible to general anesthesia.
11.2.2.1 In vivo responses to THC/cannabis in man

In contrast to the findings in conscious animals where no effect (dogs) or bradycardia (rats) was
observed, investigations in humans have consistently shown that administration of THC, Sativex®
(THC and CBD in an approximately 1:1 ratio), THC analogues such as nabilone or dronabinol, or
smoking marijuana, causes tachycardia (Bedi et al. 2013; Crawford and Merritt 1979; Karschner
et al. 2011; Mathew et al. 1992a, 1992b; Schwope et al. 2012). The tachycardic response to THC in
man can be inhibited by a CB1 receptor antagonist (Huestis et al. 2001; Klumpers et al. 2013) and
is also subject to the development of tolerance, the effect being smaller in chronic cannabis users
(Benowitz et al. 1975; Boles Ponto et al. 2004; O’Leary et al. 2002).
The effect of THC or cannabis smoking on blood pressure in humans is more variable. Some
studies have reported no change in mean arterial blood pressure (Gorelick et al. 2005; Mathew
et al. 1992a, 1992b), a decrease in blood pressure (Crawford and Merritt 1979), or an increase in
blood pressure (Boles Ponto et al. 2004). Other studies found that diastolic, but not systolic blood
pressure, is affected by THC (Karschner et al. 2011; Schwope et al. 2012). Conversely, nabilone
and dronabinol selectively decrease systolic blood pressure (Bedi et al. 2013).
Some people who take THC/cannabis experience dizziness on standing, known as postural
or orthostatic hypotension. This may be related to the reduction in diastolic blood pressure
sometimes observed with THC and/or an inability to compensate for the fall in blood pressure
(the baroreflex), which is normally brought about by sympathetically mediated vasoconstriction
to increase peripheral resistance. Mathew et al. (1992c) observed that after marijuana smoking,
some volunteers had increased orthostatic hypotension, related to a fall in cerebral blood flow
velocity (Mathew et al. 1992c, 2003). Subjects who experienced the most severe symptoms of
dizziness had the greatest fall in blood pressure and a larger reduction in cerebral blood velocity.

Phytocannabinoids and the Cardiovascular System

Gorelick et al. (2005) showed that a CB 1 antagonist administered before marijuana smoking
decreased the incidence of symptomatic orthostatic hypotension. Also, Benowitz and Jones (1976,
1981) reported that the orthostatic hypotensive response to THC diminishes with repeated THC
administration. Together, this suggests a role for CB1-mediated inhibition of sympathetic activity
involved in orthostatic hypotension, which is subject to the development of tolerance.
11.2.2.2 Changes in regional blood flow with THC/cannabis smoking

Smoking marijuana increases regional cerebral blood flow (Mathew et al. 1992a) and middle cerebral artery velocity (Mathew et al. 1992b). Cerebral blood flow is also increased after dronabinol
(Mathew et al. 2002). More specifically, Mathew and colleagues (2002) showed that cerebral blood
flow was increased for up to 2 h post-THC (0.25 mg/kg i.v.), and the areas of the brain that were
most affected included the frontal, insular, and anterior cingulate regions. Smoking marijuana
(Hepler and Frank 1971) and orally administered dronabinol (7.5 mg) (Plange et al. 2006) reduces
intraocular pressure in humans. Forearm blood flow is increased by i.v. administration of THC in
healthy volunteers (Benowitz and Jones 1981).
11.2.2.3 Summary

To summarize the complex hemodynamic effects of THC in vivo, in anesthetized animals, THC
causes a CB1-mediated reduction in heart rate and blood pressure. In conscious animals, THC
causes bradycardia and a pressor response in some animals, also mediated by CB1. However, in
conscious humans, THC causes tachycardia and variable changes in blood pressure, again mediated by CB1 and subject to the development of tolerance. It is clear that there are species differences in the cardiovascular response to THC. For example, in the conscious state, THC causes
little change in heart rate in dogs, bradycardia in rats, and tachycardia in humans. Similarly, in the
conscious state, THC causes little change in blood pressure in dogs, a pressor response in rats, and
a variable response in humans. However, the route of administration in animal studies is generally i.v., while in humans it is oral or by inhalation, which should be taken into consideration.
Additionally, although studies that have probed a mechanism of action for THC have revealed an
important role for CB1, it should be noted that other possible receptor target sites of action have
not been tested to date.
11.2.3 In vivo responses to cannabidiol in animals and man

In anesthetized rats, CBD (50 micrograms/kg but not 10 micrograms/kg, i.v.) causes a significant but transient 16 mmHg fall in mean arterial blood pressure without affecting heart rate
(Walsh et al. 2010). A single dose of CBD (10 or 20 mg/kg i.p.) also reduces the heart rate and
blood pressure response to conditioned fear (Resstel et al. 2006) or to acute restraint stress
(Resstel et al. 2009) without affecting baseline blood pressure or heart rate. The inhibitory
effect of CBD on the cardiovascular response to stress was shown to be inhibited by a serotonin
receptor (5HT1A) antagonist. This effect appears to be mediated centrally, as the response to
CBD was observed when CBD was injected into the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (Gomes
et al. 2013).

11.3 Cardiac effects of phytocannabinoids
The most consistently observed cardiovascular responses to THC or cannabis smoking are on
heart rate, and some investigators have employed a Langendorff preparation (a perfused isolated
heart) to investigate the direct effects of phytocannabinoids on the heart. In the 1970s, Smiley

211

212

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

and colleagues (1976) found that THC and cannabinol (CBN) increased heart rate and decreased
the force of contraction, while CBD decreased both heart rate and contraction, and produced
arrhythmias. Nahas and Trouve (1985) also found THC increased heart rate which was associated
with a decrease in coronary blood flow and a decrease in pulse pressure (the pressure difference
between the systolic and diastolic pressures). CBD had little effect on heart rate, but significantly
increased coronary blood flow and pulse pressure. Interestingly, when THC and CBD were coadministered (as would occur in the medication Sativex®), the effects of CBD predominated.
CBN decreased heart rate and pulse pressure with a relatively stable blood flow. A more recent
study confirmed that THC decreases coronary blood flow and left ventricular pressure in isolated
rat hearts (Wagner et al. 2005). These effects were not inhibited by CB1 antagonism, and were in
fact slightly enhanced by CB1 antagonism. Interestingly, the bradycardic response to THC was
also enhanced in the presence of a CB1 antagonist, suggesting that CB1 receptors may be coupled
to positive chronotropy (O’Sullivan et al. 2007). Wagner et al. (2005) found that abnormal CBD
(abn-CBD) caused an increase in coronary blood flow and left ventricular pressure, as observed
previously for CBD.
In anesthetized dogs, THC (2.5 mg/kg, i.v.) reduces cardiac output, stroke volume, left ventricular pressure, and left ventricular end diastolic pressure, even in paced hearts (i.e. unrelated to the
reduction in heart rate) (Cavero et al. 1973, 1974). Rather than an effect on cardiac contractility, the
reduced cardiac output and stroke volume was related to decreased venous return. This could be
inhibited by ligating the splanchnic artery, suggesting vasodilatation of the splanchnic vasculature.
Tashkin et al. (1977) showed that the tachycardia observed with THC in humans was associated with an increase in cardiac output and a small decrease in stroke volume. Echocardiographic
studies did not find any effects of chronic THC treatment on indices of left ventricular function.
Benowitz and Jones (1981) showed the tachycardic response to THC (30–50 micrograms/kg, i.v.)
was partly blocked by pretreatment with either atropine or propranolol, and abolished by the
combination of both, suggesting THC stimulates the sympathetic and inhibits parasympathetic
activity at the heart.

11.4 Cardiovascular responses to chronic phytocannabinoid

administration
11.4.1 Cardiovascular response to chronic THC/cannabis administration

Jandhyala et al. (1976) showed that 7 days of administration with 1 mg/kg THC in dogs did not
affect basal heart rate, except when they were under anesthesia, when a reduced heart rate was
observed in the THC-treated dogs. THC-treated dogs also had a reduced bradycardic response
to vagal stimulation, while the tachycardic response to sympathetic stimulation was unaffected
(both under anesthesia). More prolonged treatment with THC for 35 days led to changes in reflex
bradycardia mediated by enhanced withdrawal of sympathetic tone (Jandhyala 1978). The same
study found reductions in the resistance of the mesenteric and femoral vascular beds, and no
adverse effect on myocardial function of chronic THC administration.
In young male volunteers, 5–15 days of treatment with THC (210 mg once daily) results in a
decrease in resting blood pressure and heart rate, which returned to pretreatment values within a
day of stopping THC (Benowitz et al. 1975). In contrast, Tashkin et al. (1977) did not find any effect
of chronic THC administration (64 days of unlimited marijuana smoking) on heart rate, stroke
volume, cardiac output, or indices of left ventricular function. However, another study has shown
that cessation of cannabis use is associated with a significant increase in blood pressure and heart

Phytocannabinoids and the Cardiovascular System

rate (Vandrey et al. 2011), suggesting these are affected by chronic use. Chronic cannabis users are
reported to have decreased cerebral blood flow (Jacobus et al. 2012; Tunvig et al. 1985), which also
increases on the cessation of cannabis use.
In humans, the cardiovascular responses to THC or cannabis/marijuana smoking diminish
with repeated use such that the tachycardic (Benowitz and Jones 1981; Benowitz et al. 1975; Boles
Ponto et al. 2004; O’Leary et al. 2002), blood pressure (Benowitz and Jones 1981) and orthostatic
intolerance (Benowitz and Jones 1981; Benowitz et al. 1975) responses are smaller after chronic
use or in chronic compared to occasional users. Benowitz et al. 1975) also found that THC treatment caused an increased fall in blood pressure in response to standing (associated with dizziness), a decreased blood pressure response to exercise and an increased heart rate response to
exercise. THC treatment was associated with an increase in plasma volume. The authors suggest
that together this profile is suggestive of decreased sympathetic activity with THC treatment. The
same group also showed that THC treatment (14 days, up to 210 mg daily) increased the blood
pressure response to atropine, but had no effect on the response to either alpha or beta adrenoceptor stimulation, suggesting increased parasympathetic activity (Benowitz and Jones 1976).
11.4.2 Cardiovascular response to chronic CBD administration

In humans, 5–12 days of treatment with CBD (up to 600 mg per day) did not result in any
changes in heart rate or blood pressure (Benowitz and Jones 1981). Similarly, in a recent review,
Bergamaschi et al. (2011) report that CBD treatment in humans does not result in changes in
blood pressure or heart rate.

11.5 Direct vascular actions of phytocannabinoids in isolated

vascular preparations
11.5.1 Acute vasorelaxation response to THC

A number of studies have shown that application of THC causes acute relaxation (within minutes)
of isolated preconstricted vascular preparations including rabbit kidney arterioles, rabbit cerebral
arterioles, rat mesenteric arteries, rat hepatic arteries, and the rat aorta (Ellis et al. 1995; Fleming
et al. 1999; O’Sullivan et al. 2005a, 2005b, 2005c; Zygmunt et al. 2002). We have also shown that
THC relaxes human mesenteric arteries, although the magnitude of this response was blunted
compared to that seen in animals (Stanley et al. 2011). The vasorelaxant effect of THC, unlike that
of other cannabinoids like anandamide, is not universal. No effect of THC has been observed in
rabbit carotid arteries or porcine coronary arteries, and some studies have reported a contractile
effect of THC, which will be discussed in section 11.5.3.
A variety of mechanisms have been proposed to underlie the vasorelaxant response to THC in
various vascular preparations. These include a role for the production of vasoactive prostaglandins, activation of sensory nerves and the release of vasoactive neuropeptides. There is, however,
little evidence for a role for the endothelium (except perhaps in the rat aorta), no evidence for a
role for the CB1 receptor and only one study showing a role for CB2 in the rat aorta. There is also
evidence to suggest that THC causes vasorelaxation through modulation of ion channels. The
evidence for each of these mechanisms will be discussed in the following sections.
11.5.1.1 A role for metabolism

The first paper showing the vasorelaxant properties of THC in an isolated organ preparation came
from Kaymakcalan and Türker (1975), who showed that THC causes a concentration-dependent

213

214

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

decrease in the perfusion pressure of approximately 25 mmHg of an isolated kidney. This effect
was inhibited by aspirin, a COX inhibitor, suggesting that the involvement of vasodilator prostaglandins. Ellis et al. (1995) later showed that topical application of THC causes concentrationdependent vasodilatation of cerebral arteries (maximal effect was about 25% relaxation) measured
using a cranial window technique in an anesthetized rabbit. This effect was also inhibited by a
COX inhibitor.
In 1999, Fleming and colleagues showed that THC causes acute, maximal vasorelaxation of
isolated rabbit mesenteric arteries, but not rabbit carotid arteries, or porcine coronary arteries.
The effect of THC in the mesenteric arteries was inhibited by diclofenac, another COX inhibitor. However, in rat mesenteric arteries, indomethacin has no effect on THC-induced relaxation
(O’Sullivan et al. 2005a). The relaxation produced by THC in the work by Zygmunt and colleagues
(2002) was produced in the presence of indomethacin, also suggesting COX is not involved in
relaxation to THC in rat mesenteric arteries. This may reflect a species difference (rabbit versus
rat), or could be due to differences in the mechanisms underpinning THC’s effects in different
vascular beds (renal or cerebral arteries versus mesenteric arteries). Interestingly, a role for prostanoids has also been implicated in mediating the vasoconstrictor effects of THC in the rabbit
lung, rat superior mesenteric artery and the rat aorta (see section 11.5.3). Therefore, THC may
have the potential to cause both vasoconstriction and vasorelaxation depending on the prostanoid
produced (a vasorelaxant versus a vasoconstrictor prostanoid), the balance of both vasorelaxant
or vasoconstrictor prostanoids produced, or the prostanoid receptors expressed on that particular
artery.
11.5.1.2 A role for sensory nerves

Zygmunt et al. (2002) showed that THC caused concentration-dependent vasorelaxation of rat
hepatic and mesenteric arteries, which could be abolished by pretreatment with the TRPV1 agonist capsaicin, which depletes the sensory neurotransmitters in the artery. However, in similar
arteries (rat mesenteric resistance) we have shown that vasorelaxation to THC was unaffected by
incubation with the TRPV1 receptor agonist capsaicin, except in the presence of L-NAME and
indomethacin, which were the experimental conditions of Zygmunt and colleagues (O’Sullivan
et al. 2005a). This might suggest that this pathway becomes more prevalent when other vasodilator pathways are suppressed. In the rat aorta, vasorelaxation to THC was inhibited by capsaicin
pretreatment (O’Sullivan et al. 2005b), which may reflect differences between small versus large
arteries.
Interestingly, Zygmunt and colleagues showed that the vasorelaxant response to THC in mesenteric arteries persists in TRPV1 knockout mice, and that vasorelaxation to THC was sensitive
to ruthenium red, which inhibits several other members of the TRPV family. This suggests that
another member of the TRPV family must be responsible, perhaps TRPV4, -5, or -6 (Zygmunt
et al. 2002). Vasorelaxation to THC in rat mesenteric arteries is not sensitive to the TRPV1 receptor antagonist, capsazepine, further evidence that TRPV1 is not involved (O’Sullivan et al. 2005a;
Zygmunt et al. 2002).
The vasorelaxant response to THC was inhibited by a calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)
antagonist, suggesting that this is the vasoactive neurotransmitter responsible for mediating the
effects of THC (Zygmunt et al. 2002). This was confirmed by the detection of CGRP release
from mesenteric arteries in response to THC (10 μM), that could be inhibited by ruthenium red
(Zygmunt et al. 2002). Wilkinson et al. (2007) later confirmed that THC (1 and 10 μM) causes
the release of CGRP from perfused rat mesenteric beds. The release of CGRP by THC in the first
30 min was inhibited by ruthenium red but not capsazepine, but the sustained release of CGRP

Phytocannabinoids and the Cardiovascular System

(30 min to 2 h) was inhibited by capsazepine, although the authors suggest this might be due to
capsazepine inhibiting other ion channels.
In addition to the evidence that THC stimulates sensory nerves to cause vasorelaxation, there
is evidence that THC can also inhibit sensory nerves. In the whole perfused rat mesenteric bed,
Duncan et al. (2004) showed that THC concentration-dependently reduces the vasorelaxant
response to electrical field stimulation (EFS), which normally causes the release of CGRP and
vasorelaxation. THC did not directly affect the vasorelaxant response to CGRP or capsaicin
administration, suggesting this effect is prejunctional. This was confirmed by Wilkinson et al.
(2007) who also showed that THC significantly reduced the amount of CGRP released and
­vasorelaxation by the whole mesenteric bed caused by EFS. This response to THC was insensitive
to capsazepine, but was sensitive to ruthenium red, as in the studies of Zygmunt and colleagues
(2002). In rat isolated resistance mesenteric arteries, THC (1 μM) did not affect nerve-mediated
contractions induced by EFS (Lay et al. 2000).
In summary, in the vasculature, THC can activate sensory nerves to release vasoactive neurotransmitters causing relaxation of the artery or vascular bed. However, THC can also inhibit the
release of vasoactive neurotransmitters, and the vasorelaxation that would accompany this through
a prejunctional site. Both of these responses to THC appear to be mediated by members of the
TRPV receptor family, but not TRPV1.
11.5.1.3 A role for the endothelium

The effects of THC are not inhibited by removal of the endothelium in rabbit mesenteric arteries
(Fleming et al. 1999), rat hepatic or mesenteric arteries (O’Sullivan et al. 2005a; Zygmunt et al.
2002). However, in the rat aorta, vasorelaxation to THC was inhibited by removal of the endothelium (O’Sullivan et al. 2005b). We have also found that a time-dependent vasorelaxant effect of
THC can be observed in the rat aorta that was sensitive to removal of the endothelium (O’Sullivan
et al. 2005c, see section 11.5.2). Together, this might suggest that a role for the endothelium in vasorelaxation to THC is only observed in the aorta, or perhaps other large conduit arteries, but this
is yet to be tested. As THC is not sensitive to removal of the endothelium, this suggests that THC
does not act via the cannabinoid receptor that is proposed to exist on the endothelium, sometimes
termed CBe (Begg et al. 2005; Jarai et al. 1999).
11.5.1.4 A role for cannabinoid receptors

The vasorelaxant effects of many cannabinoids such as anandamide are at least partly mediated
by activation of the CB1 receptor in the vasculature in a number of different arteries (see Randall
et al. 2004). Although THC has similar affinity and efficacy as anandamide at CB1, CB1 receptor
antagonism does not affect the vasorelaxant effect of THC in rat mesenteric or hepatic arteries
(O’Sullivan et al. 2005a; Zygmunt et al. 2002) or rat aorta (O’Sullivan et al. 2005b). The reduction
in the vasorelaxant response to EFS by THC in the whole mesenteric bed is also not sensitive to
CB1 (Duncan et al. 2004; Wilkinson et al. 2007).
Many of the studies investigating the direct vascular effects of THC have not probed activation
of CB2 as a mechanism of action, possibly because previous studies have shown there is little role
for CB2 in the vascular responses to cannabinoids. However, one study showed that vasorelaxation to THC in the rat aorta was inhibited by in vivo pretreatment with pertussis toxin (inhibits
Gi/o protein coupled receptors) and also by CB2 receptor antagonism (O’Sullivan et al. 2005b). In
pathological situations such as atherosclerosis, activation of CB2 by THC may play a more important role (see Fernández-Ruiz et al. Chapter 27, this volume).

215

216

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

We have observed that THC-induced vasorelaxation in resistance arteries of the mesenteric
bed is inhibited by pertussis toxin (PTX), but not CB1, suggesting THC might act through an as
yet unidentified G protein coupled receptor (O’Sullivan et al. 2004). As THC is not sensitive to
removal of the endothelium in these arteries, it is unlikely to be the proposed endothelial cannabinoid receptor (Begg et al. 2005; Jarai et al. 1999). We have therefore suggested that perhaps there is
another as yet uncloned cannabinoid receptor in the vasculature that is expressed on the vascular
smooth muscle and that is activated by THC.
11.5.1.5 A role for ion channel modulation

There is evidence to show that THC can modulate ion channel activity, which might be coupled
to receptor activation, or might be a direct effect of THC. In rat mesenteric resistance arteries,
vasorelaxation to THC was inhibited when arteries were contracted with a high potassium solution, implicating the activation of potassium channels as a mechanism by which THC causes
relaxation (O’Sullivan et al. 2005a). The use of specific inhibitors indicated that THC activates
large and small calcium-activated potassium channels and the voltage-dependent inward rectifier
potassium channel, but not the KATP or Kv channels (O’Sullivan et al. 2005a).
In rat mesenteric resistance arteries, THC (10 and 100 µM) inhibits the contractile response to
the addition of calcium (Ca2+) to a Ca2+-free, high potassium buffer, suggesting that THC blocks
Ca2+ influx (O’Sullivan et al. 2005a). This was not altered by CB1 receptor antagonism. In the rat
aorta and superior mesenteric artery, THC (10 µM) also inhibits the contractile response to calcium in the same experimental protocol (O’Sullivan et al. 2006), indicating this response to THC
is observed in arteries of different sizes.
11.5.2 Time-dependent responses to THC in isolated arteries

In section 11.5.1, evidence was reviewed on the acute effects of THC in isolated vascular preparations. In these experiments, the vasorelaxant response to THC in preconstricted arteries was
generally observed within minutes. THC (10 µM) also causes a time-dependent (over 2 h) vasorelaxation of rat aortae (approximately 50%) and the superior mesenteric artery (approximately
25%) compared with vehicle treated vessels (O’Sullivan et al. 2005c). A time-dependent effect of
THC was not observed in resistance arteries of the mesenteric bed (O’Sullivan et al. 2006). This
suggests that the time-dependent effects of THC are only observed in larger conduit arteries, and
also that the acute vasorelaxant effects of THC in small resistance arteries is transient.
On probing the mechanisms underpinning the time-dependent effects of THC, it was found
that the effect of THC was inhibited by an antagonist of the peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPARγ) nuclear receptor, in a similar manner to other PPARγ ligands like
rosiglitazone (O’Sullivan et al. 2005c). The time-dependent response to THC was not inhibited by
CB1 antagonism, but was inhibited by inhibition of protein synthesis, removal of the endothelium,
nitric oxide synthase (NOS) inhibition and superoxide dismutase (SOD) inhibition. These findings are similar to those observed with PPARγ ligands in the vasculature.
In a subsequent study, when either the aorta or superior mesenteric arteries were incubated
with THC (10 μM) for 2 h (but not 10 min), subsequent vasoconstrictor responses to methoxamine were blunted (O’Sullivan et al. 2006). Vasorelaxant responses to acetylcholine were also
enhanced, but only in the superior mesenteric artery. The blunting of methoxamine responses
was not inhibited by PPARγ antagonism or NOS inhibition, but was reduced by catalase, suggesting a role for hydrogen peroxide production. It was also partly reduced by a SOD inhibitor. The
enhanced vasorelaxant response to acetylcholine by THC was reduced by PPARγ antagonism,
catalase and SOD inhibition. Together, these data suggest that PPARγ agonism by THC in conduit

Phytocannabinoids and the Cardiovascular System

arteries reduces contractile responses and enhances vasorelaxation through increased SOD activity producing hydrogen peroxide.
11.5.3 Vasoconstrictor responses to THC

While many studies have shown vasorelaxant effects of THC in various vascular preparations,
others have shown that THC causes vasoconstriction. Kaymakcalan and Türker (1975) showed
that THC injected into the pulmonary artery causes a concentration-dependent increase in
the perfusion pressure of an isolated lung (but relaxation of the isolated kidney), which could
be inhibited by aspirin and by SC19220, a selective antagonist of the prostanoid EP1 receptor.
Interarterial administration of THC also causes a dose-dependent increase in perfusion pressure
(of about 30 mmHg) of the hindquarters (Adams et al. 1976). This could be inhibited by alpha
adrenergic blockade with phentolamine, or reserpine, which depletes catecholamines, both suggesting an action on the release of norepinephrine from sympathetic nerve terminals. Barbosa
et al. (1981) found that THC caused a concentration-dependent increase in the perfusion pressure
of the rabbit ear artery, which could be inhibited by artery denervation or reserpine.
Some investigators have found that THC causes vasoconstriction of the whole perfused mesenteric bed (Duncan et al. 2004; Wagner et al. 1999). This is clearly in contrast to the numerous
studies showing THC can relax isolated mesenteric arteries. These opposing vascular responses
to THC may be dependent on the artery being examined based on the findings that THC causes
relaxation of third- and second-order (to a lesser extent) branches of the mesenteric bed, but has
little effect in the first order branches of the mesenteric bed, and causes a contractile response in
the isolated superior mesenteric artery (O’Sullivan et al. 2005a; see Fig. 11.1).
In the superior mesenteric artery, the vasoconstriction caused by THC was inhibited by removal of the endothelium and a CB1 receptor antagonist, but not by an endothelin (ETA) receptor
antagonist (O’Sullivan et al. 2005a). Interestingly, COX inhibition revealed a relaxant response to
THC in lower concentration ranges, suggesting the production of a vasoconstrictor prostanoid
which is masking any vasorelaxant effect of THC in the superior mesenteric artery. Similarly, the
vasorelaxant response to THC in the rat aorta was enhanced after COX inhibition (O’Sullivan
et al. 2005c). In an unconstricted rat aorta, THC causes concentration-dependent vasoconstriction that can be inhibited by PTX, CB1 antagonism and COX inhibition (O’Sullivan et al. 2005b).
Together, these studies suggest that when THC causes vasoconstriction, it is through a CB 1dependent, endothelium-dependent mechanism involving the production of vasoconstrictor

100

G3
G2

% relaxation

75

G1
G0

50
25
0
–25

–8

–7
–6
–5
–4
Log concentration of THC (M)

Fig. 11.1 THC causes vasorelaxant and
vasoconstrictor responses in descending
branches of the mesenteric bed (O’Sullivan
et al. 2005a). G0, superior mesenteric
artery (SMA); G1, first-order branch of
–3 the SMA; G2, second-order branch of the
SMA; G3, third-order branch of the SMA.

217

218

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

prostaglandins. In some vascular beds, the vasoconstrictor effect of THC is brought about by sympathetic stimulation. The vasoconstrictor response to THC appears to be dependent on the artery
size, being more prevalent in larger conduit arteries. It also seems more likely that a constrictor
effect would be seen in a whole perfused vascular bed where the balance of the contribution of
larger and smaller arteries to perfusion pressure may favor the effects of THC in larger arteries.
The vasoconstrictor response to THC also may depend on the vascular bed being studied, for
example, a contractile effect of THC has been observed in the mesenteric bed and lung, but not
in the kidney.
11.5.4 Other actions of THC in isolated vascular preparations

In addition to the direct vasorelaxant and vasoconstrictor responses to THC seen in isolated
arteries, THC can inhibit the responses to other agonists that cause vasorelaxation such as acetylcholine, bradykinin, carbachol, and anandamide. Fleming et al. (1999) first showed that THC (30
µM) inhibits the vasorelaxant response to acetylcholine in rabbit carotid and mesenteric arteries in the presence of NO and COX inhibition, and these authors suggested that THC inhibits
endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor (EDHF) release. This was partly inhibited by the
CB1 antagonist SR141716A, although at a very high concentration (30 μM) that is probably having many off target effects. The same group went on to show that THC also inhibits bradykinin
relaxation in porcine coronary arteries, which was inhibited by an ERK inhibitor (Brandes et al.
2002). THC also inhibits the vasorelaxant effect of the endogenous cannabinoid anandamide, but
not through the CB1 or TRPV1 receptor (O’Sullivan et al. 2005a). In rat mesenteric arteries, THC
(10 µM) inhibits the vasorelaxant response to acetylcholine in the presence of a NOS inhibitor
(i.e. not by inhibiting nitric oxide) (O’Sullivan et al. 2006), However, when EDHF was blocked,
there was no longer any effect of THC, giving further evidence that THC is capable of inhibiting
agonist-stimulated production of EDHF in resistance arteries.
11.5.5 Summary of the direct vascular effects of THC in the vasculature

In summary, THC has complex actions in isolated vascular preparations. The acute vasorelaxant effects of THC involves the production of vasodilator prostaglandins, activation of TRPV
channels on sensory nerves and the release of the vasoactive neuropeptide CGRP, activation of
potassium channels and inhibition of calcium channels. No major role for the endothelium or
cannabinoid receptors has been identified. The acute response to THC is also transient.
In contrast, THC inhibits the vasorelaxant response of the whole mesenteric bed via sensory
nerve stimulation and TRPV activation, and also inhibits the vasorelaxant response to a number
of vasorelaxant agonists through inhibition of EDHF or its communication through gap junctions. A vasoconstrictor response to THC is observed in some preparations through sympathetic
stimulation, CB1 activation and the production of vasoconstrictor prostanoids.
THC also causes a time-dependent vasorelaxation that is only observed in larger conduit arteries and is dependent on PPARγ activation, the endothelium, NO, and SOD. Incubation of arteries
with THC for 2 h blunts subsequent methoxamine responses and enhances acetylcholine responses in conduit arteries. This is mediated by PPARγ, SOD, and the production of hydrogen peroxide.
11.5.6 Acute vascular responses to CBD and abnormal CBD

Despite the wealth of literature on the vascular effects of THC, only a limited number of studies
to date have investigated the direct vascular responses to CBD in isolated arteries. Jarai and colleagues (1999) found no effect of CBD (10 µM) on vascular tone in phenylephrine-constricted

Phytocannabinoids and the Cardiovascular System

rat whole mesenteric beds. However, in isolated mesenteric arterial segments, CBD caused a
concentration-dependent near-maximal vasorelaxation (Offertaler et al. 2003). Unfortunately,
this study did not probe the mechanisms underlying this response. Topical administration of
CBD decreases intraocular pressure in the cat (Colasanti et al. 1984). In rat aortae, 10 min of
incubation with CBD causes a concentration-dependent (in the micromolar range) inhibition of
the contractile response to calcium, suggesting that CBD inhibits calcium channels (O’Sullivan
et al. 2009).
In human mesenteric arteries, CBD causes vasorelaxation of preconstricted arterial segments
with a pEC50 in the mid-micromolar range similar to that observed in rat mesenteric arteries
(Stanley and O’Sullivan 2012). However, CBD-induced vasorelaxation in human arteries has a
lower maximal response (~45% reduction of preimposed tone). Investigations into the mechanisms underpinning the CBD-induced vasorelaxation in human mesenteric arteries showed an
involvement of CB1 and TRPV1 activation, nitric oxide release and potassium channel activation.
Vasorelaxation to CBD in human mesenteric arteries is also endothelium-dependent, but was not
affected by antagonism of CBe.
The vascular effects of the CBD analogue, abn-CBD, have been better characterized in the
vasculature, as this compound is suggested to be an agonist of CBe. Jarai et al. (1999) showed that
abn-CBD causes hypotension in both CB1+/+/CB2+/+ and CB1−/−/CB2−/− mice, and the acute vasorelaxant effects of abn-CBD were inhibited by high concentrations of SR141716A, endothelium
denudation and CBD. In this study, CBD antagonized the vasorelaxant effects of abn-CBD and
anandamide. Begg et al. (2003) showed that abn-CBD causes hyperpolarization through PTXsensitive activation of large conductance calcium activated potassium channels (BKCa) in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells. In isolated rat mesenteric arteries, abn-CBD causes vasorelaxation that is dependent on the endothelium, SR141716A sensitive pathways and potassium channel hyperpolarization through calcium activated potassium channels (Ho and Hiley 2003). More
recently it has been shown that abn-CBD causes vasorelaxation in the human isolated pulmonary
artery through similar mechanisms (Kozlowska et al. 2007).
11.5.7 Time-dependent responses to CBD

CBD is a weak/partial agonist at the PPARγ receptor which increases PPARγ transcriptional
activity, and binds to the PPARγ ligand binding domain with an IC 50 ≈ 5 μM (O’Sullivan et al.
2009). CBD (at concentrations above 100 nM) also causes a time-dependent vasorelaxation of rat
aortae. This time-dependent vasorelaxation was inhibited by PPARγ antagonism or SOD inhibition, but was not inhibited by PTX treatment, CB1 or CB2 antagonism, capsaicin pretreatment,
removal of the endothelium, or NOS inhibition. In human mesenteric arteries, CBD causes a
time-dependent response, but this effect is not inhibited by a PPARγ antagonist.
11.5.8 Summary of the direct vascular effects of CBD

In summary, CBD causes acute relaxation of animal arteries through unknown mechanisms that
might partly involve inhibition of calcium channels, and causes a time-dependent vasorelaxant
effect in rat aortae through PPARγ and SOD. In human mesenteric arteries, CBD causes vasorelaxation through activation of CB1, TRPV1, the endothelium, NO release, and potassium channel activation. Abn-CBD causes acute vasorelaxation of animal and human arteries through the
proposed endothelial cannabinoid receptor and potassium channel activation. CBD is suggested
to antagonize this endothelial cannabinoid receptor, although data obtained from human arteries
do not support this.

219

220

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

11.6 Vascular effects of other phytocannabinoids
Few studies have investigated the direct vascular effects of lesser known phytocannabinoids.
Cannabinol (CBN) relaxes isolated rat hepatic arteries, which is antagonized by ruthenium red,
but not capsazepine, indicating actions at a TRPV channel other than TRPV1 (Zygmunt et al.
2002). Topical application of both CBN and cannabigerol (CBG) decrease intraocular pressure
in the cat (Colasanti et al. 1984). Tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV) causes a modest vasorelaxant
effect in small resistance arteries of the rat mesenteric bed, which reverses at higher concentrations (S.E. O’Sullivan, unpublished observations). In unconstricted vessels, THCV has no effect
on vascular tone until 10 μM, and then causes contraction. The contractile effects of THCV in
rat mesenteric arteries were not affected by removal of the endothelium, CB1 antagonism or COX
inhibition. THCV (100 nM) does not antagonize the vasorelaxant effect of anandamide and, at
1 μM, does not affect the contractile response to methoxamine in mesenteric resistance arteries
(S.E. O’Sullivan, unpublished observations).

11.7 Action of phytocannabinoids in vascular cell lines
Some studies have employed vascular cell lines as a means of further exploring the mechanisms
that might underlie the vascular responses to phytocannabinoids.
In porcine endothelial cells, gap junction communication was reversibly reduced by 15 min of
incubation with THC (30 μM) to a level observed with a gap junction inhibitor (Brandes et al.
2002). This was partially inhibited by a CB1 receptor antagonist. In human vein endothelial cells,
the same study showed that THC increases connexin 43 phosphorylation (a gap junction protein)
via ERK signaling. These findings tie in with the in vitro experiments in isolated arteries discussed in section 11.5.4 showing that THC can inhibit the vasorelaxant response to a number of
vasorelaxant agents through inhibition of EDHF or its communication through gap junctions. In
confluent endothelial cells, THC decreased cytochrome P450 enzyme activity and isoprenalineinduced cAMP levels (Fleming et al. 1999). Cytochrome P450 is suggested to be involved in the
production of EDHF in some vascular beds, and so this might be a mechanism by which THC
inhibits EDHF production.
In human vein endothelial cells, CBD inhibited cell proliferation at concentrations above 9 μM
and cell migration above 1 μM (Solinas et al. 2012). CBD also inhibited angiogenesis and downregulated some of the key proteins involved in angiogenesis. This is suggested to be a mechanism
by which CBD might be beneficial as an antitumor agent (see Velasco et al. Chapter 35, this
volume).
In rat brain microvascular endothelial cells, CBD inhibits the basal to apical transport of a
fluorescent probe (Zhu et al. 2006). Although not tested in that cell line, it was suggested by the
authors to be due to inhibition of the P-glycoprotein transporter, a drug efflux transporter, which
could potentially influence the absorption and disposition of drugs at the blood–brain barrier.
In cultured smooth muscle cells, THC, CBD, and CBN decrease low-density lipoproteininduced cholesteryl ester formation in the low micromolar range (Cornicelli et al. 1981).
Phospholipids and triglycerides were not affected, so this is unlikely to be due to a general
effect on lipid metabolism, and THC, CBD, and CBN were not found to bind to the lowdensity lipoprotein receptor. The authors suggest that these phytocannabinoids compartmentalize cholesterol, making it unavailable for metabolism, and that this might represent
an antiatherosclerotic mechanism of these drugs (see Fernández-Ruiz et al. Chapter 27, this
volume).

Phytocannabinoids and the Cardiovascular System

11.8 Chapter summary
It is clear that phytocannabinoids have interesting and complex effects throughout the cardiovascular system. However, most studies to date have focused on the effects of THC, and we know little
about other phytocannabinoids, even CBD. In vivo, THC causes a fall in blood pressure and heart
rate in anesthetized animals, and increase in blood pressure and decrease in heart rate in conscious
animals, but an increase in heart rate and variable effects on blood pressure in humans. CBD does
not appear to elicit hemodynamic responses in vivo. The effects of THC involve changes in the
activity of the autonomic nervous system and appear to be mediated by CB1, which is potentially
why we don’t see similar hemodynamic responses to CBD, which is not thought to activate CB1. In
vitro, both vasorelaxation (THC, CBD, CBN, THCV) and vasoconstriction (THC, THCV) to phytocannabinoids have been observed. Vasorelaxation to THC is mediated by prostaglandins, activation of sensory nerves, modulation of ion channels, and activation of PPARγ. Vasoconstriction to
THC is mediated by prostanoids, CB1 and sympathetic stimulation. One study in human arteries
suggests CBD causes vasorelaxation by activation of CB1, TRPV1, and nitric oxide. THC also
inhibits the vasorelaxation caused by sensory nerve activation, or by agonists such as acetylcholine, bradykinin and anandamide, which is suggested to be through inhibition of EDHF.

11.9 Directions for future research
◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

Further investigation into the acute and chronic in vivo hemodynamic effects of phytocannabinoids are warranted, especially for CBD, THCV, CBN, and CBG which haven’t been fully
investigated in animals or humans. The mechanisms of how phytocannabinoids act in vivo
have only been probed in studies from the 1990s onward with the advent of antagonists and
deeper knowledge of the cannabinoid system, therefore further studies are required to establish any potential role of receptors other than CB1.
Many of the human studies were carried out in volunteers who were not drug naïve (although
sometimes drug free at the time of experimentation). Since the in vivo responses to cannabis
and THC seem to be CB1 mediated and subject to tolerance, the hemodynamic responses
might be underestimated. Most studies in humans have been in healthy volunteers and therefore the cardiovascular effects of phytocannabinoids in people who might have cardiovascular
disorders, for example, hypertension, remain unknown.
In in vitro studies, research has focused on the effects of THC, and CBD to a lesser extent.
Further investigations into these and other phytocannabinoids are required to understand
their pharmacology in the vasculature, particularly in vascular beds other than the mesentery
such as the coronary and cerebral vasculature.
Only one study to date has investigated the direct effects of phytocannabinoids in human
arteries. It is difficult to tell at this stage whether the mechanisms underpinning the effects of
CBD, or indeed other phytocannabinoids, are different between animals and humans, because
they have never been fully probed in animals.
It is unlikely that all the target sites of action for phytocannabinoids in the vasculature have
been identified. For example, which are the other members of the TRP family that phytocannabinoids act at? Is there a role for CB2? Is there a vascular smooth muscle site that has yet to
be identified? Is there a role for GPR55?
There are surprisingly few studies in vascular cell lines examining the cellular effects, and
underpinning mechanisms of action of phytocannabinoids in the vasculature.

221

222

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

◆

No studies have looked at the effects of chronic phytocannabinoid treatment on the direct
vascular responses to phytocannabinoids in isolated arterial preparations to establish if there
are any changes in these responses with repeated use.

References
Adams, M.D., Earnhardt, J.T., Dewey, W.L., and Harris, L.S. (1976). Vasoconstrictor actions of delta8and delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in the rat. Journal Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 196,
649–656.
Barbosa, P.P., Lapa, A.J., Lima-Landman, M.T., and Valle, J.R. (1981). Vasoconstriction induced by delta
9-tetrahydrocannabinol on the perfused rabbit ear artery. Archives Internationales de Pharmacodynamie
et de Thérapie, 252, 253–2561.
Bedi, G., Cooper, Z.D., and Haney, M. (2013). Subjective, cognitive and cardiovascular dose-effect profile
of nabilone and dronabinol in marijuana smokers. Addiction Biology, 18, 872–881.
Begg, M., Mo, F.-M., Offertaler, L., et al. (2003). G protein-coupled endothelial receptor for atypical
cannabinoid ligands modulates a Ca2+-dependent K+ current. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 278,
46188–46194.
Benowitz, N.L. and Jones, R.T. (1975). Cardiovascular effects of prolonged delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
ingestion. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 18, 287–297.
Benowitz, N.L. and Jones, R.T. (1977). Prolonged delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol ingestion. Effects of sympathomimetic amines and autonomic blockades. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 21, 336–342.
Benowitz, N.L. and Jones, R.T. (1981). Cardiovascular and metabolic considerations in prolonged cannabinoid administration in man. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 21, 214S–223S.
Bergamaschi, M.M., Queiroz, R.H., Zuardi, A.W., and Crippa, J.A. (2011). Safety and side effects of cannabidiol, a Cannabis sativa constituent. Current Drug Safety, 6, 237–249.
Brandes, R.P., Popp, R., Ott, G., et al. (2002). The extracellular regulated kinases (ERK) 1/2 mediate
cannabinoid-induced inhibition of gap junctional communication in endothelial cells. British Journal
Pharmacology, 136, 709–716.
Burstein, S., Ozman, K., Burstein, E., Palermo, N., and Smith, E. (1982). Prostaglandins and cannabis – XI.
Inhibition of delta 1-tetrahydrocannabinol-induced hypotension by aspirin. Biochemical Pharmacology,
31, 591–592.
Cavero, I., Lokhandwala, M.F., Buckley, J.P., and Jandhyala, B.S. (1974). The effect of (minus)-delta
9-trans-tetrahydrocannibinol on myocardial contractility and venous return in anesthetized dogs.
European Journal of Pharmacology, 29, 74–82.
Cavero, I., Solomon, T., Buckley, J.P., and Jandhyala, B.S. (1973). Studies on the bradycardia induced
by (-)- -trans-tetrahydrocannabinol in anesthetized dogs. European Journal of Pharmacology, 22,
263–269.
Colasanti, B.K., Craig, C.R., and Allara, R.D. (1984). Intraocular pressure, ocular toxicity and neurotoxicity after administration of cannabinol or cannabigerol. Experimental Eye Research, 39, 251–259.
Cornicelli, J.A., Gilman, S.R., Krom, B.A., and Kottke, B.A. (1981). Cannabinoids impair the formation of
cholesteryl ester in cultured human cells. Arteriosclerosis, 1, 449–454.
Cotterill, R.W., Penney, L.L., Vaughn, D.L., Reimann, B.E. and Rauls, D.O. (1984). Acute cardiovascular
effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in pregnant anesthetized sheep. Biological Research in Pregnancy
and Perinatology, 5, 1–5.
Crawford, W.J. and Merritt, J.C. (1979). Effects of tetrahydrocannabinol on arterial and intraocular hypertension. International Journal of Clinical Pharmacology and Biopharmacy, 17, 191–196.
Duncan, M., Kendall, D.A., and Ralevic, V. (2004). Characterization of cannabinoid modulation of
sensory neurotransmission in the rat isolated mesenteric arterial bed. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 311, 411–419.

Phytocannabinoids and the Cardiovascular System

Ellis, E.F., Moore, S.F., and Willoughby, K.A. (1995). Anandamide and delta 9-THC dilation of cerebral
arterioles is blocked by indomethacin. American Journal of Physiology, 269, H1859–1864.
Estrada, U., Brase, D.A., Martin, B.R., and Dewey, W.L. (1987). Cardiovascular effects of delta 9- and
delta 9(11)-tetrahydrocannabinol and their interaction with epinephrine. Life Science, 41, 79–87.
Fleming, I., Schermer, B., Popp, R., and Busse, R. (1999). Inhibition of the production of endotheliumderived hyperpolarizing factor by cannabinoid receptor agonists. British Journal of Pharmacology, 126,
949–960.
Gardiner, S.M., March, J.E., Kemp, P.A., and Bennett, T. (2001). Regional haemodynamic responses to
the cannabinoid agonist, WIN 55212-2, in conscious, normotensive rats, and in hypertensive, transgenic
rats. British Journal of Pharmacology, 133, 445–453.
Gomes, F.V., Alves, F.H., Guimaraes, F.S., Correa, F.M., Resstel, L.B., and Crestani, C.C. (2013).
Cannabidiol administration into the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis alters cardiovascular responses
induced by acute restraint stress through 5-HT(1A) receptor. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 23,
1096–1104.
Gorelick, D.A., Heishman, S.J., Preston, K.L., Nelson, R.A., Moolchan, E.T., and Huestis, M.A. (2006).
The cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist rimonabant attenuates the hypotensive effect of smoked marijuana in male smokers. American Heart Journal, 151, 754.e1–754.e5.
Green, K., Wynn, H., and Padgett, D. (1978). Effects of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on ocular blood flow
and aqueous humor formation. Experimental Eye Research, 26, 65–69.
Hepler, R.S. and Frank, I.R. (1971). Marihuana smoking and intraocular pressure. JAMA, 217, 1392.
Ho, W.S. and Hiley, C.R. (2003). Vasodilator actions of abnormal-cannabidiol in rat isolated small mesenteric artery. British Journal of Pharmacology, 138, 1320–1332.
Huestis, M.A., Gorelick, D.A., Heishman, S.J., et al. (2001). Blockade of effects of smoked marijuana by the
CB1-selective cannabinoid receptor antagonist SR141716. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58, 322–328.
Innemee, H.C., Hermans, A.J., and van Zwieten, P.A. (1979). The influence of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol
on intraocular pressure in the anaesthetized cat. Advances in Ophthalmology, 48, 235–241.
Jacobus, J., Goldenberg, D., Wierenga, C.E., Tolentino, N.J., Liu, T.T., and Tapert, S.F. (2012). Altered
cerebral blood flow and neurocognitive correlates in adolescent cannabis users. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin), 222, 675–684.
Jandhyala, B.S. (1978). Effects of prolonged administration of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol on the
autonomic and cardiovascular function and regional hemodynamics in mongrel dogs. Research
Communications in Chemical Pathology and Pharmacology, 20, 489–508.
Jandhyala, B.S. and Buckley, J.P. (1977). Influence of several anesthetic agents on the effect of delta9tetrahydrocannabinol on the heart rate and blood pressure of the mongrel dog. European Journal of
Pharmacology, 44, 9–16.
Jandhyala, B.S. and Hamed, A.T. (1978). Pulmonary and systemic hemodynamic effects of delta9tetrahydrocannabinol in conscious and morphine-chloralose-anesthetized dogs: anesthetic influence
on drug action. European Journal of Pharmacology, 53, 63–68.
Jandhyala, B.S., Malloy, K.P., and Buckley, J.P. (1976a). Effects of acute administration of delta9tetrahydrocannabinol on pulmonary hemodynamics of anesthetized dogs. European Journal of
Pharmacology, 38, 183–187.
Jandhyala, B.S., Malloy, K.P., and Buckley, J.P. (1976b). Effects of chronic administration of delta9tetrahydrocannabinol on the heart rate of mongrel dogs. Research Communications in Chemical
Pathology and Pharmacology, 14, 201–204.
Jarai, Z., Wagner, J.A., Varga, K.R., et al. (1999). Cannabinoid-induced mesenteric vasodilation through
an endothelial site distinct from CB1 or CB2 receptors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 96, 14136–14141.
Karschner, E.L., Darwin, W.D., McMahon, R.P., et al. (2011). Subjective and physiological effects after
controlled Sativex and oral THC administration. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 89, 400–407.

223

224

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Kaymakcalan, S. and Türker, R.K. (1975). The evidence of the release of prostaglandin-like material from
rabbit kidney and guinea-pig lung by (minus)-trans-delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of Pharmacy
and Pharmacology, 27, 564–568.
Klumpers, L.E., Roy, C., Ferron, G., et al. (2013). Surinabant, a selective CB1 antagonist, inhibits
THC-induced central nervous system and heart rate effects in humans. British Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 76, 65–77.
Kozlowska, H., Baranowska, M., Schlicker, E., Kozlowski, M., Laudanski, J., and Malinowska, B. (2007).
Identification of the vasodilatory endothelial cannabinoid receptor in the human pulmonary artery.
Journal of Hypertension, 25, 2240–2248.
Krowicki, Z.K. (2012). Involvement of hindbrain and peripheral prostanoids in gastric motor and cardiovascular responses to delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in the rat. Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology,
63, 581–588.
Lake, K.D., Compton, D.R., Varga, K., Martin, B.R., and Kunos, G. (1997). Cannabinoid-induced hypotension and bradycardia in rats mediated by CB1-like cannabinoid receptors. Journal Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 281, 1030–1107.
Lambert, D.M. (2001). Medical use of cannabis through history. Journal of Pharmacy Belgium, 56, 111–118.
Lay, L., Angus, J.A. and Wright, C.E. (2000). Pharmacological characterisation of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in the rat and mouse. European Journal of Pharmacology, 391, 151–161.
Mathew, R.J., Wilson, W.H. and Davis, R. (2003). Postural syncope after marijuana: a transcranial Doppler
study of the hemodynamics. Pharmacology Biochemistry & Behavior, 75, 309–318.
Mathew, R.J., Wilson, W.H., Humphreys, D., Lowe, J.V., and Wiethe, K.E. (1992a). Middle cerebral
artery velocity during upright posture after marijuana smoking. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 86,
173–178.
Mathew, R.J., Wilson, W.H., Humphreys, D.F., Lowe, J.V., and Wiethe, K.E. (1992b). Changes in middle
cerebral artery velocity after marijuana. Biological Psychiatry, 32, 164–169.
Mathew, R.J., Wilson, W.H., Humphreys, D.F., Lowe, J.V., and Wiethe, K.E. (1992c). Regional cerebral
blood flow after marijuana smoking. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 12, 750–758.
Nahas, G. and Trouve, R. (1985). Effects and interactions of natural cannabinoids on the isolated heart.
Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 180, 312–316.
Niederhoffer, N. and Szabo, B. (1999). Effect of the cannabinoid receptor agonist WIN55212-2 on sympathetic cardiovascular regulation. British Journal of Pharmacology, 126, 457–466.
Niederhoffer, N. and Szabo, B. (2000). Cannabinoids cause central sympathoexcitation and bradycardia in
rabbits. Journal Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 294, 707–713.
O’Leary, D.S., Block, R.I., Koeppel, J.A., et al. (2002). Effects of smoking marijuana on brain perfusion and
cognition. Neuropsychopharmacology, 26, 802–816.
O’Sullivan, S.E., Kendall, D.A. and Randall, M.D. (2005a). The effects of Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in
rat mesenteric vasculature, and its interactions with the endocannabinoid anandamide. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 145, 514–526.
O’Sullivan, S.E., Kendall, D.A. and Randall, M.D. (2005b). Vascular effects of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), anandamide and N-arachidonoyldopamine (NADA) in the rat isolated aorta. European Journal
of Pharmacology, 507, 211–221
O’Sullivan, S.E., Kendall, D.A. and Randall, M.D. (2006). Further characterization of the time-dependent
vascular effects of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics,
317, 428–438.
O’Sullivan, S.E., Randall, M.D., and Gardiner, S.M. (2007). The in vitro and in vivo cardiovascular effects
of Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in rats made hypertensive by chronic inhibition of nitric-oxide synthase. Journal Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 321, 663–672.
O’Sullivan, S.E., Sun, Y., Bennett, A.J., Randall, M.D., and Kendall, D.A. (2009). Time-dependent vascular actions of cannabidiol in the rat aorta. European Journal of Pharmacology, 612, 61–68.

Phytocannabinoids and the Cardiovascular System

O’Sullivan, S.E., Tarling, E.J., Bennett, A.J., Kendall, D.A., and Randall, M.D. (2005c). Novel timedependent vascular actions of Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol mediated by peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor gamma. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 337, 824–831.
Offertaler, L., Mo, F.-M., Bátka, S., et al. (2003). Selective ligands and cellular effectors of a G proteincoupled endothelial cannabinoid receptor. Molecular Pharmacology, 63, 699–705.
Plange, N., Arend, K.O., Kaup, M., et al. (2007). Dronabinol and retinal hemodynamics in humans.
American Journal of Ophthalmology, 143, 173–174.
Ponto, L.L., O’Leary, D.S., Koeppel, J., et al. (2004). Effect of acute marijuana on cardiovascular function
and central nervous system pharmacokinetics of [(15)O]water: effect in occasional and chronic users.
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 44, 751–66.
Randall, M.D., Kendall, D.A., and O’Sullivan, S. (2004). The complexities of the cardiovascular actions of
cannabinoids. British Journal of Pharmacology, 142, 20–26.
Resstel, L.B., Joca, S.R., Moreira, F.A., Correa, F.M. and Guimaraes, F.S. (2006). Effects of cannabidiol
and diazepam on behavioral and cardiovascular responses induced by contextual conditioned fear in
rats. Behavioural Brain Research, 172, 294–298.
Resstel, L.B., Tavares, R.F., Lisboa, S.F., Joca, S.R., Correa, F.M. and Guimaraes, F.S. (2009). 5-HT1A
receptors are involved in the cannabidiol-induced attenuation of behavioural and cardiovascular
responses to acute restraint stress in rats. British Journal of Pharmacology, 156, 181–188.
Schwope, D.M., Bosker, W.M., Ramaekers, J.G., Gorelick, D.A. and Huestis, M.A. (2012). Psychomotor
performance, subjective and physiological effects and whole blood Δ⁹-tetrahydrocannabinol concentrations in heavy, chronic cannabis smokers following acute smoked cannabis. Journal of Analytical
Toxicology, 36, 405–412.
Siqueira, S.W., Lapa, A.J., and Ribeiro do Valle, J. (1979). The triple effect induced by delta 9tetrahydrocannabinol on the rat blood pressure. European Journal of Pharmacology, 58, 351–357.
Smiley, K.A., Karler, R., and Turkanis, S.A. (1976). Effects of cannabinoids on the perfused rat heart.
Research Communications in Chemical Pathology and Pharmacology, 14, 659–675.
Solinas, M., Massi, P., Cantelmo, A.R., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol inhibits angiogenesis by multiple mechanisms. British Journal of Pharmacology, 167, 1218–1231.
Stanley, C., Manning, G., and O’Sullivan, S. (2011). Cannabinoid induced vasorelaxation of human mesenteric arteries. Proceedings of the International Cannabinoid Research Society. Available at: http://bps.
conference-services.net/resources/344/2336/pdf/BPSWINTER10_0158.pdf.
Stanley, C.P. and O’Sullivan, S.E. (2012). Cannabidiol induced vasorelaxation of human mesenteric arteries is mediated by the endothelium, CB1 and TRPV1. Proceedings of the International Cannabinoid
Research Society, P1-25. Available at: http://www.icrs.co/SYMPOSIUM.2012/ICRS2012.Final.
Programme.and.Abstracts.pdf.
Tashkin, D.P., Levisman, J.A., Abbasi, A.S., Shapiro, B.J., and Ellis, N.M. (1977). Short-term effects of
smoked marihuana on left ventricular function in man. Chest, 72, 20–26.
Tunving, K., Thulin, S.O., Risberg, J., and Warkentin, S. (1986). Regional cerebral blood flow in longterm heavy cannabis use. Psychiatry Research, 17, 15–21.
Vandrey, R., Umbricht, A., and Strain, E.C. (2011). Increased blood pressure after abrupt cessation of daily
cannabis use. Journal of Addiction Medicine, 5, 16–20.
Varga, K., Lake, K.D., Huangfu, D., Guyenet, P.G., and Kunos, G. (1996). Mechanism of the hypotensive
action of anandamide in anesthetized rats. Hypertension, 28, 682–686.
Wagner, J.A., Abesser, M., Karcher, J., Laser, M., and Kunos, G. (2005). Coronary vasodilator effects
of endogenous cannabinoids in vasopressin-preconstricted unpaced rat isolated hearts. Journal of
Cardiovascular Pharmacology, 46, 348–355.
Wagner, J.A., Varga, K., Jarai, Z., and Kunos, G. (1999). Mesenteric vasodilation mediated by endothelial
anandamide receptors. Hypertension, 33, 429–434.

225

226

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Walsh, S.K., Hepburn, C.Y., Kane, K.A., and Wainwright, C.L. (2010). Acute administration of cannabidiol in vivo suppresses ischaemia-induced cardiac arrhythmias and reduces infarct size when given at
reperfusion. British Journal of Pharmacology, 160, 1234–1242.
Wilkinson, J.D., Kendall, D.A., and Ralevic, V. (2007). Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol inhibits electricallyevoked CGRP release and capsaicin-sensitive sensory neurogenic vasodilatation in the rat mesenteric
arterial bed. British Journal of Pharmacology, 152, 709–716.
Zhu, H.J., Wang, J.S., Markowitz, J.S., et al. (2006). Characterization of P-glycoprotein inhibition by major
cannabinoids from marijuana. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 317, 850–857.
Zuardi, A.W. (2006). History of cannabis as a medicine: a review. Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria, 28,
153–157.
Zygmunt, P.M., Andersson, D.A., and Hogestatt, E.D. (2002). Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabinol activate capsaicin-sensitive sensory nerves via a CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptor-independent
mechanism. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 4720–4727.

Chapter 12

Phytocannabinoids and the
Gastrointestinal System
Marnie Duncan and Angelo A. Izzo

12.1 Introduction
Phytocannabinoids include about 100 meroterpenoids (prenylated polyketides), accumulated
in tiny epidermal resinous glands of the cannabis plant and characterized, in most instances,
by specific and potent pharmacological activities (Appendino et al. 2011). For obvious reasons,
most attention has been paid to Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), which is the most important
psychotropic component. The THC content in cannabis extracts is extremely variable, reaching
15% in some varieties currently available in the illegal market (Appendino et al. 2011). In addition
to THC, the plant cannabis also contains nonpsychotropic cannabinoids of potential therapeutic
interest. These include cannabigerol (CBG), cannabichromene (CBC), THC, and their corresponding acids (Izzo et al. 2009).
The benefits of cannabis extracts for gastrointestinal (GI) disorders have been well documented
for centuries. Cannabis has been used to treat conditions such as emesis, gastric ulcer, abdominal
pain, gastroenteritis, diarrhea, and intestinal inflammation. Scientific evidence for empirical traditional uses of cannabis for GI disorders emerged about 35 years ago, when it was demonstrated
that a crude cannabis extract exerted protective effects in an experimental model of gastric ulceration (De Souza et al. 1978).
This chapter focuses on the pharmacological effects and the modes of action of phytocannabinoids in the digestive tract both under normal and pathophysiological conditions.

12.2 Main phytocannabinoid targets and their localization

in the gut
Phytocannabinoid may activate—or modulate the activity of—the classical targets of the endogenous cannabinoids. These include cannabinoid receptors types 1 and 2 (CB1 and CB2), enzymes
involved in the degradation of endocannabinoids, i.e., monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL, mostly
involved in 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) catabolism) and fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH,
mostly involved in anandamide enzymatic degradation), as well as transient receptor potential
(TRP) channels, G protein-coupled receptor 55 (GPR55), and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptors (PPARs). A brief discussion on the localization and role of these targets in the gut is
reported in sections 12.2.1 to 12.2.5.
12.2.1 Cannabinoid receptors

THC, the main psychotropic cannabis ingredient, is a CB1 and CB2 receptor partial agonist and, in
line with classical pharmacology, it evokes pharmacological responses which are clearly influenced

228

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

both by the expression level and signaling efficiency of cannabinoid receptors (Pertwee 2008).
Cannabinol (CBN), another phytocannabinoid, is a weak CB1 partial agonist, with approximately
10% of the activity of THC (Izzo et al. 2009). By contrast, nonpsychotropic phytocannabinoids
generally do not activate cannabinoid receptors efficiently. An exception is THCV, which has been
shown to behave as a CB2 receptor agonist and CB1 receptor antagonist in vitro and to attenuate
inflammation in vivo (Bolognini et al. 2010; Pertwee 2008). THCV also shares the ability of synthetic CB1 antagonists to reduce food intake in mice (Riedel et al. 2009). Finally, CBD has been
shown to display unexpectedly high potency as an antagonist of CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists
in vitro (Thomas et al. 2007).
In the digestive tract, CB1 receptors are located predominantly in the excitatory motor neurons
of the myenteric plexus, which regulate gut motility. In vitro activation of these receptors inhibits
contraction mainly by the inhibition of acetylcholine release from prejunctional neurons, and
these findings have also been confirmed in vivo (Izzo and Coutts 2005). The inhibitory actions
of CB1 receptors on GI motility are thought to be predominantly via enteric receptors, and this
has been confirmed using a peripherally restricted cannabinoid receptor agonist SAB378 (Cluny
et al. 2010). In the submucosal plexus, CB1 receptors are localized on secretomotor and vasomotor neurons. Cannabinoids are thought to inhibit secretion via activation of CB1 receptors on
these neurons (Duncan et al. 2005). In addition to being localized within the gut, CB1 receptors
are also present on peripheral nerve fibers within the brain-gut axis. CB1 receptors may influence
motility and secretion via these receptors as well as modulate food intake and emesis (Duncan
et al. 2005). CB1 receptors may play a role in intestinal inflammation as they are upregulated in
response to an inflammatory insult such as mustard oil, croton oil, or dinitrobenzene sulfonic
acid (DNBS) (Izzo et al. 2001; Kimball et al. 2010; Massa et al. 2004). CB1 receptors are also
expressed in GI epithelia, human parietal cells, and macrophages within the gut wall (Izzo and
Sharkey 2010; Wright et al. 2005).
CB2 receptors have been reported to be expressed on excitatory motor neurons, but not on
inhibitory motor neurons or enteric glia. CB2 receptors are not thought to modulate motility in
the gut under normal conditions, but do normalize deregulated motility in inflammatory conditions by reducing neuronal activation (Duncan et al. 2008a; Mathison et al. 2004). CB2 receptors
are also expressed in GI epithelia, and can be upregulated by probiotic treatment or IBS (Izzo and
Sharkey 2010; Wright et al. 2005, 2008).
12.2.2 Enzymes involved in endocannabinoid degradation

Both fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH, an enzyme mostly involved in the anandamide degradation) and MAGL (monoacylglycerol lipase, an enzyme mostly involved in 2-AG degradation)
have been shown to be targets for some phytocannabinoids. For example, CBD has been shown to
inhibit FAAH activity in biochemical assays (Bisogno et al. 2001) as well as FAAH protein expression in the inflamed gut (De Filippis et al. 2008). In addition, CBC has been shown to be a weak
inhibitor of MAGL (De Petrocellis et al. 2011).
FAAH is a membrane-bound enzyme which hydrolyzes and therefore terminates the actions
of anandamide and 2-AG. FAAH is expressed throughout the GI tract in myenteric neurons
(Duncan et al. 2005). Inhibition of FAAH delays GI motility by increasing local levels of endocannabinoids in a manner that increases CB1 receptor activation. FAAH is thought to be protective
under pathophysiological conditions as FAAH−/− mice show less inflammation in models of colitis (Massa et al. 2004). In addition, the FAAH inhibitor URB597 and the anandamide membrane
transport inhibitor VDM11 significantly reduced inflammation in such models. These effects

Phytocannabinoids and the Gastrointestinal System

were abolished in CB1 and CB2 receptor gene-deficient mice (Storr et al. 2008). Moreover, FAAH
inhibition can reverse the actions of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on GI transit via CB1 and CB2
receptors (Bashashati et al. 2012).
MAGL is the principal 2-AG-hydrolyzing enzyme, and is expressed throughout the rodent gut.
MAGL is expressed in neurons in the myenteric and submucosal plexuses (Duncan et al. 2008b).
MAGL is also expressed in the epithelium. The protein levels of MAGL progressively increase
from the duodenum through to the colon. Conversely, the highest activity is observed in the duodenum and progressively decreases toward the colon. Inhibition of MAGL can reduce whole-gut
transit in a dose-dependent manner. This is thought to be due to an increase in local endocannabinoid levels which then activate CB1 receptors in the enteric nervous system as it was not observed
in CB1 knockout mice (Duncan et al. 2008b). In human samples, MAGL was detected in fibers of
the enteric nervous system and in epithelial cells, but not in human smooth muscle and mucosal
layers (Marquez et al. 2009). In samples from patients with ulcerative colitis, an increase of MAGL
expression in the colonic epithelium was observed, suggesting an increase of 2-AG turnover during the inflammation (Marquez et al. 2009). 2-AG may also be protective in the stomach, since the
MAGL inhibitor JZL184 prevented diclofenac-induced gastric hemorrhage. This protective effect
is thought to result from increased stomach levels of 2-AG that possibly induce a CB1 receptormediated inhibition of increased release of gastric interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-10, IL-6, tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-α and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (Kinsey et al. 2011).
12.2.3 G protein-coupled receptor 55

There have been several reports that the GPR55 gene is present within the GI tract, although
to date, there have been no localization studies to determine if this expression is neuronal,
muscular, or mucosal (Ross et al. 2012). The atypical cannabinoid O-1602 inhibits neurogenic
contractions in the mouse colon via GPR555; these finding were confirmed using CB1 and CB2
knockout tissues as controls (Ross et al. 2012). Although the effects were predominantly prejunctional, some were postjunctional at high concentrations and effects on calcium influx have
been ruled out. GPR55 appears to be upregulated (at gene and protein level) by inflammation in
the duodenum, ileum, and colon in a LPS model of sepsis (Lin et al. 2011); the upregulation of
GPR55 was reversed by CBD and O-1602. CBD is thought to be an antagonist at GPR55, whereas
O-1602 is an agonist. The authors speculate that GPR55 could be pro-inflammatory in the gut,
and that CBD exerted its anti-inflammatory effect by acting as a GPR55 antagonist (Lin et al.
2011).
12.2.4 Transient receptor potential channels

TRP channels play an important role in GI motility, GI sensation, and GI disorders. In addition,
CB1 receptors and TRPV1 channels are colocalized in primary afferent nerves in the gut (Izzo and
Sharkey 2010), and the endocannabinoid, anandamide, can activate both these pharmacological
targets. Certain phytocannabinoids can also activate TRP channels. De Petrocellis and coworkers
have reported that CBD, CBG, CBGV, and THCV stimulate and desensitize human TRPV1, and
also that the majority of phytocannabinoids activate and desensitize TRPV2 (De Petrocellis et al.
2011). These channels are expressed on visceral afferents and epithelial cells: TRPV1 is thought
to have a role in visceral chemoception, mechanoception, and nociception. However, the role of
TRPV2 in gut is still unknown (Boesmans et al. 2011).
Both experimentally and in the clinic, phytocannabinoids can be administered as standardized cannabis extracts enriched with particular phytocannabinoids. Such an extract is commonly

229

230

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

termed “botanic drug substance” (BDS). CBG BDS (i.e., cannabis standardized extract enriched
in CBG) and THCV BDS (i.e., cannabis standardized extract enriched in THCV) are potent rat
TRPM8 antagonists (De Petrocellis et al. 2011). The implications of this are unclear as this channel, located on visceral afferents, is activated by cooling or menthol. However, menthol actions in
gut are reported to be TRPM8 independent and so the physiological function of this channel in
the GI tract is unknown (Boesmans et al. 2011).
CBC, CBD, THCV, and CBN are TRPA1 agonists and desensitizers (De Petrocellis et al. 2011).
The TRPA1 channel is activated by pungent compounds such as mustard oil and is expressed in
visceral afferents. This channel contributes to mechanosensation, and is thought to play a role in
mast cell activation and in the regulation of 5-hydroxytryptamine release in enterochromaffin
cells (Boesmans et al. 2011). The TRPA1 channel may represent an important pharmacological
target for cannabinoids in the gut.
A recent paper reported that the plant cannabinoid CBC affects TRPV1, TRPV3, and TRPV4
expression in the GI tract that had been increased by an inflammatory insult (De Petrocellis et al.
2012). A further study found that CBC normalized croton oil-induced hypermotility in vivo, and
reduced electrically and acetylcholine-induced contractions. These actions were not mediated by
cannabinoid receptors or TRPA1 channels (Izzo et al. 2012). These data indicate that CBC can
modify TRP channel expression under inflammatory conditions but does not appear to interact
directly with such channels (at least in motility/contractility studies).
12.2.5 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors

Endogenous, synthetic, and plant-derived cannabinoids are known to activate PPARs, a family
of nuclear receptors comprising three isoforms—α, β, and γ—which regulate cell differentiation,
metabolism, and immune function. Anandamide and oleoylethanolamide (a structural analogue
of anandamide) may activate PPARα (Borrelli and Izzo 2009; Capasso and Izzo 2008), which
is expressed by neurons in the myenteric and submucosal plexuses throughout the GI tract.
Furthermore, anandamide and 2-AG, and ajulemic acid, a structural analogue of THC, elicit
anti-inflammatory effects via PPARγ activation (O’Sullivan and Kendall 2010). Among the phytocannabinoids, THC and CBD are known to activate PPARγ (O’Sullivan and Kendall 2010). CBD
has been shown to exert antiproliferative effects in colorectal carcinoma cells with a mechanism
involving, at least in part, PPARγ activation (Aviello et al. 2012). Similarly, CBD has been found
to reduce the expression of S100β and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) proteins in intestinal biopsies of ulcerative colitis patients in a PPARγ-antagonist sensitive manner (De Filippis
et al. 2011).

12.3 Pharmacological actions
12.3.1 Gastric acid secretion and gastroprotection

Cannabinoids decrease acid production in rodents via CB1 receptor activation (Adami et al.
2002, Coruzzi et al. 2006). The site of action is on vagal efferent pathways to the gastric mucosa
and not on parietal cells because CB1 receptor activation results in a reduction in acid secretion
induced by 2-deoxy-D-glucose and pentagastrin (which increases acid secretion through the
release of acetylcholine), but not by histamine, which directly activates H2 receptors on parietal
cells (Adami et al. 2002). In agreement with a gastric antisecretory action, CB1 receptor activation
by cannabinoids is protective in animal models in which gastric ulcers have been induced by:
(1) aspirin (Rutkowska and Fereniec-Gołebiewska 2009), (2) water immersion and restraint stress

Phytocannabinoids and the Gastrointestinal System

(Dembiński et al. 2006; Warzecha et al. 2011), or (3) cold/restraint stress (Germanò et al. 2011).
Similarly, FAAH inhibitors also show gastroprotective effects (Naidu et al. 2009; Sasso et al. 2012),
while CB1 receptor antagonists both increase acid production in vitro and aggravate experimentally induced gastric lesions (Borrelli 2007; Dembiński et al., 2006).
Studies on plant-derived cannabinoids were first performed before the discovery of cannabinoid receptors. An acute treatment with a Cannabis sativa extract affected the lesion pattern and
incidence of ulcerations associated with restraint-induced gastric ulcerations in rats (De Souza
et al. 1978). THC produced a marked reduction in gastric ulcer formation in the pylorus-ligated
rat test (Sofia et al. 1978). This reduction was more pronounced after subcutaneous than oral
administration. THC reduced gastric juice volume, while free and total gastric acid content was
not modified (Sofia et al. 1978). In an in vitro study, THC did not modify resting acid production in rats, but did inhibit gastric acid secretion induced by histamine (Rivas and Josè 1980),
which is suggestive of a direct action of THC on parietal cells that is most likely not mediated
by CB1 receptors (see earlier in this section). Nevertheless, the quite recent discovery of CB 1
receptors on human parietal cells (Pazos et al. 2008) points to species differences and suggests
that further studies are needed to fully establish the mode of action of THC in the control of GI
acid secretion.
12.3.2 Lower esophageal sphincter

The lower esophageal sphincter (LES) is a specialized, involuntary, ring-shaped, smooth muscle
located at the base of the esophagus that allows the passage of a swallowed bolus and prevents
the reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus. Defects in LES relaxation can lead to gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). CB1 receptor activation has been shown to inhibit transient
LES relaxations in dogs and ferrets (Beaumont et al. 2009; Lehmann et al. 2002; Partosoedarso
et al. 2003), the effect being associated, at least in the dog, with the inhibition of gastroesophageal
reflux (Beaumont et al. 2009; Lehmann et al. 2002). Central and peripheral vagal mechanisms
are involved in these functional changes (Beaumont et al. 2009). Similarly, in healthy volunteers,
THC (10 mg and 20 mg) both inhibited the increase in transient LES relaxations evoked by meal
ingestion, and reduced spontaneous swallowing as well as basal LES pressure (Beaumont et al.
2009). After intake of 20 mg THC, half of the subjects experienced nausea and vomiting leading
to premature termination of the study. Other side effects were hypotension, tachycardia, and central effects (Beaumont et al. 2009). Intriguingly, a placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized,
crossover study demonstrated that the CB1 receptor antagonist, rimonabant, inhibited the mealinduced increase in transient LES relaxation, increased postprandial LES pressure leading to a
lower number of acid reflux events, and increased the duration of distal esophageal peristaltic
waves (Scarpellini et al. 2011).
12.3.3 Gastrointestinal motility

Cannabinoid receptor agonists have been shown to reduce gastric, small intestinal, and colonic
motility both in isolated segments and in in vivo studies in rodents (Pinto et al. 2002a). The effect
is largely due to CB1 receptor activation, although CB2 receptors may be involved in some pathophysiological states (see sections 12.3.5–12.3.8). In vitro, cannabinoids act on prejunctional CB1
receptors to reduce smooth muscle contractility and peristalsis in different regions of the rodent
GI tract (Aviello et al. 2008; Izzo and Sharkey 2010). A number of cannabinoid receptor agonists
have shown high potency as inhibitors of electrically induced contractions in several intestinal
isolated preparations, including human ones. Notably, the plant cannabinoids THC and CBN

231

232

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

have been shown to reduce electrically evoked contractions in the guinea pig (Pertwee et al. 1992,
1996; R.A. Ross et al. 1998) and rat (Makwana et al. 2010) ileum. The mechanism by which cannabinoid receptor activation reduces contractility is mainly related to reduction of acetylcholine
release from myenteric nerves. Conversely, cannabinoid receptor antagonists/inverse agonists
have been shown to increase electrically evoked contractions in isolated rodent intestinal segments and to accelerate gastric emptying and intestinal motility in vivo (Di Marzo et al. 2008;
Pertwee et al. 1996; Pinto et al. 2002b; Storr et al. 2010).
The ability of plant cannabinoids to reduce intestinal motility was already known before the
discovery of cannabinoid receptors. In 1972, Dewey and colleagues were the first to report that
THC reduced the rate of passage of a charcoal meal along the mouse small intestine (Dewey et al.
1972). These findings were confirmed in other studies (Anderson et al. 1974; Chesher et al. 1973;
Jackson et al. 1976; Shook et al. 1986). In each of these early experiments THC was administered
intraperitoneally or subcutaneously and it was found to be six to ten times less potent than morphine in slowing the transit. However, when administered intravenously, THC was equipotent
with morphine (Shook and Burks 1989). Interestingly, THC antagonized (at low doses, i.e., 0.25
mg/kg) or potentiated (at a higher dose, i.e., 1 mg/kg) the decreased motility induced by prostaglandin E2 in mice (Jackson et al. 1976).
In a more complete study, Shook and Bruks showed that THC and CBN slowed the rate of gastric emptying and small intestinal transit when injected intravenously in mice and rats. Whereas
THC equally inhibited gastric emptying and small intestinal transit, CBN had only minimal
effects on gastric emptying. THC produced greater inhibition of gastric emptying and small
intestinal transit than of large bowel transit, indicating a relative selectivity for the more proximal
section of the gut. When THC was injected intracerebroventricularly, it inhibited transit, but
only at doses which were also active when injected intravenously, implying that it was acting at
a peripheral site (Shook and Burks 1989). In more recent years, with the availability of selective
receptor antagonists, other investigators have shown that the inhibitory effects of THC and CBN
on GI motility are mediated by cannabinoid receptor activation (Izzo et al. 2000; Krowicki et al.
1999; Pinto et al. 2002b). Specifically, intraperitoneally administered CBN reduces the passage of
charcoal in the mouse small intestine and increases the time of expulsion of a bead inserted in
the mouse colon in a CB1 antagonist-sensitive way (Izzo et al. 2000; Pinto et al. 2002b). Similarly,
the CB1 receptor antagonist rimonabant counteracted the long-lasting decrease in rat intragastric
pressure and pyloric contractility evoked by intravenously administered THC (Krowicki et al.
1999). The effect of THC on gastric motility was abolished by bilateral vagotomy at the mid cervical level and by hexamethonium, but not by transection of the cervical spinal cord suggesting
that this phytocannabinoid produces its inhibitory effects on the stomach partly by acting on the
dorsal vagal complex of the hindbrain to modulate vagal (parasympathetic) outflow to gastric
smooth muscle (Krowicki et al. 1999).
Recently, the nonpsychotropic phytocannabinoids CBD and CBC have been evaluated as modulators of intestinal motility, both in isolated intestinal segments and in in vivo studies on transit.
Neither compound modified intestinal motility in control mice in vivo, but both of them did
normalize motility following the administration of an inflammatory insult (Capasso et al. 2008a;
Izzo et al. 2012; Lin et al. 2009; see also later sections). In the isolated mouse intestine, CBD
reduced acetylcholine- and KCl-induced contractions, suggesting a nonspecific antispasmodic
effect (Capasso et al. 2008a). In the same tissue, CBC preferentially reduced electrically induced
contractions—­rather than acetylcholine-induced contractions—by a mechanism involving neuronal N-type Ca2+ channels (Izzo et al. 2012).

Phytocannabinoids and the Gastrointestinal System

12.3.4 Intestinal fluid secretion

An adequate fluid secretion is required for the normal passage of gut contents along the bowel.
In the colon, fluid is absorbed, limiting water content; a failure to absorb water or any situation
of excessive secretion leads to diarrhea. Studies on isolated intestinal segments have shown that
activation of CB1 receptors may produce an antisecretory effect through a neuronal mechanism
involving the inhibition of neurotransmitter(s) release from submucosal plexus neurons and
extrinsic primary afferents (MacNaughton et al. 2004; Tyler et al. 2000). In vivo, cannabinoid receptor agonists reduce intestinal hypersecretion induced by cholera toxin in mice (Izzo et al. 2003).
The effect of plant-derived cannabinoids on intestinal water and electrolyte transport has not
been thoroughly evaluated. Early studies showed that THC enhanced net water absorption in the
rat ileum, and this effect was not associated with a reduced content of prostaglandin E2-like mat­
erial (Coupar and Taylor 1983).
12.3.5 Visceral sensation

Experimental evidence suggests that CB1 or CB2 receptor activation inhibits visceral sensitivity
and pain in rodents. The CB1 receptor-mediated analgesic effect is associated with downregulation of TRPV1, whilst CB2 receptor agonist inhibition of visceral pain responses appears to be
due to inhibition of the algesic responses to bradykinin (Izzo and Sharkey 2010). Booker and
colleagues assessed the antinociceptive effect of a number of plant-derived cannabinoids in the
acetic acid stretching test, a rodent visceral pain model. It was found that THC and CBN exerted a
CB1 antagonist-sensitive, but not a CB2 antagonist-sensitive antinociceptive effect at doses lower
than those necessary to produce locomotor suppression. Also, consistent with its CB 1 receptor
antagonistic properties, THCV had no effect when administered alone, but did counteract the
antinociceptive effect of THC (Booker et al. 2010). A previous report showed that both a crude
marijuana extract, and THC, CBN, but not CBD, displayed a significant analgesic effect in the
acetic acid stretching test, with THC being as active as morphine (Sofia et al. 1975).
12.3.6 Intestinal inflammation

Animal studies have shown that cannabinoids, via CB1 or CB2 receptor activation, as well as via
elevation of endocannabinoid levels, effectively attenuate inflammation in well-established models of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (Alhouayek et al. 2011, 2012; Bento et al. 2011; D’Argenio
et al. 2006; Engel et al. 2006, 2010; Kimball et al. 2006; Massa et al. 2004; Singh et al. 2012; Storr
et al. 2008, 2009). Conversely, experimental inflammation is exacerbated in CB1 or CB2 receptor
knockout mice or in mice treated with CB1 or CB2 receptor antagonists (Engel et al. 2010; Massa
et al. 2004). In the gut of patients with IBD, adaptive changes of the endogenous cannabinoid
system (e.g., changes in cannabinoids receptors and/or in endocannabinoid levels resulting from
modifications of one or more of the enzymes involved in endocannabinoid biosynthesis or degradation) have been observed (D’Argenio et al. 2006; Di Sabatino et al. 2011; Wright et al. 2005).
Concerning plant-derived cannabinoids, THC, CBD, CBC, and CBG have proved to be beneficial in experimental models of IBD. Jamontt and colleagues showed that THC reduced signs of
damage, inflammation, and functional disturbance in the trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS)
rat model of IBD. THC also improved the function of cholinergic motoneurons, while sulfasalazine (a standard treatment for IBD) did not show any protective effect on TNBS-induced changes
in motility (Jamontt et al., 2010). THC also restored the increased permeability induced by ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) in intestinal epithelial cells (Alhamoruni et al. 2010).

233

234

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

The first demonstration of a beneficial action of CBD in intestinal inflammation was provided
by Borrelli and colleagues, who demonstrated that this phytocannabinoid, given intraperitoneally, reduced the degree of intestinal inflammation caused by intracolonic administration of
dinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (DNBS) in mice. The protective effect of CBD was associated with
downregulation of iNOS (but not cyclooxygenase-2) expression and modulation of cytokine (IL1β and IL-10) levels, whereas it did not involve interference with endocannabinoid inactivation
mechanisms such as FAAH inhibition (Borrelli et al. 2009). The beneficial effect of CBD in mice
has recently been confirmed by Schicho and Storr, who, by demonstrating that not only intraperitoneal administration but also intrarectal treatment with CBD led to a significant improvement of
disease parameters, have provided evidence that intrarectal delivery of cannabidiol may represent
a useful therapeutic administration route for the treatment of colonic inflammation (Schicho and
Storr, 2012). Finally, CBD proved beneficial in the TNBS model of colitis in rats with its dose–
response relationship showing a bell-shaped pattern for the majority of parameters investigated
(Jamontt et al. 2010). CBD not only reduced inflammation, but also lowered the occurrence of
functional disorders; in addition, CBD acted additively or synergistically with THC to reduce
inflammation and to protect cholinergic nerves (Jamontt et al. 2010).
Experiments on isolated intestinal cells have confirmed the beneficial effect of CBD against
inflammatory insults. In colorectal carcinoma (Caco-2) cells, CBD prevented oxidative stress,
which may be one of the underlying factors leading to mucosal protection in vivo (Borrelli et al.,
2009). Also, CBD was able to restore the increased permeability induced by EDTA or cytokine in
the Caco-2 cell culture model of intestinal permeability (Alhamoruni et al. 2010, 2012). The effect
was sensitive to a cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist, but not to CB2 receptor, TRPV1, PPARγ,
or PPARα antagonists. Finally, in intestinal segments obtained from mice with LPS-induced
intestinal inflammation, CBD was found to counteract reactive enteric gliosis, an effect associated
with a massive reduction in the astroglial signaling neurotrophin S100β (De Filippis et al. 2011).
Similarly, CBD reduced the expression of S100β and iNOS proteins in human biopsy samples
obtained from patients with ulcerative colitis (De Filippis et al. 2011).
Recently, CBG and CBC have been shown to exert preventive and therapeutic effect in the
DNBS murine model of colitis (Borrelli et al. 2013; Romano et al. 2013). Both CBC and CBG
reduced the colon weight/colon length ratio (a simple and reliable marker of intestinal inflammation), myeloperoxidase activity, and intestinal permeability in DNBS-treated mice. More in-depth
studies showed that the beneficial effect of CBG was associated with modulation of cytokine
(IL-1β, IL-10, and interferon-γ) levels and downregulation of iNOS (but not cyclooxygenase-2)
expression. In intestinal epithelial cells, CBG prevented reactive oxygen species production,
which may help to explain the protective effect of this phytocannabinoid that has been observed
in vivo (Borrelli et al. 2013).
12.3.7 Motility dysfunctions in the inflamed gut

Changes in the endogenous cannabinoid system during inflammation may alter and/or contribute to motility changes that occur in IBD patients. Experimental evidence suggests that, depending on the inflammatory insult, both CB1 and CB2 receptor activation may reduce hypermotility
associated with gut inflammation (Duncan et al. 2008a; Izzo 2004; Mathison et al. 2004; Wright
et al. 2008). Thus, intestinal inflammation induced by croton oil is characterized by disruption
of the mucosa and an infiltration of lymphocytes into the sub mucosa (Pol and Puig 1997), and
such changes are associated with decreased anandamide and palmitoylethanolamide levels, as
well as with upregulation of cannabinoid CB1 receptors and TRPA1 channels (Capasso et al. 2001;

Phytocannabinoids and the Gastrointestinal System

Izzo et al. 2001, 2012). Motility in the croton oil model of ileitis can be attenuated by a number
of drugs including CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists (Capasso et al. 2008b; Izzo et al. 2001). CBN,
CBD, and CBC have been evaluated for their ability to alter the motility changes associated with
the intestinal inflammation induced by oral croton oil administration, as detailed in section 3.7.
Like other cannabinoid receptor agonists, CBN (a partial cannabinoid CB1 receptor agonist)
reduced intestinal motility both in control and in croton oil-treated animals, displaying greater
inhibitory activity in pathological states. Interestingly, this inhibitory effect was accompanied not
only by a leftward shift in the in vivo log dose–response curve of CBN, but also by an increase in
the size of its maximal effect (Izzo et al. 2001). The synthetic agonist CP55940, which has higher
CB1 efficacy than CBN, exhibited a potency increase but no change in its maximal effect (Izzo
et al. 2001). The low doses of CBN that are needed to reduce motility during intestinal inflammation are of interest in the light of possible therapeutic applications of such a compound in IBD.
More recently, the nonpsychotropic phytocannabinoids CBD and CBC have been evaluated
in the croton oil model of intestinal hypermotility. Although neither CBD nor CBC modify
intestinal motility in control mice, both of them do normalize intestinal motility in inflamed
mice (Capasso et al. 2008a; Izzo et al. 2012). The inhibitory effect of CBD could involve CB1
receptors via elevation of endocannabinoid levels at these receptors induced by FAAH inhibition,
which is consistent with the ability of this phytocannabinoid to reduce FAAH expression in the
inflamed—but not in the normal—mouse gut (De Filippis et al. 2008). On the other hand, the
inhibitory effect of CBC did not involve cannabinoid receptors or TRPA1 channels. In vitro, both
CBC and CBD exerted spasmolytic actions in ilea from control and croton oil-treated animals.
More in depth studies on CBC showed that this phytocannabinoid altered the ex vivo expression
of a number of TRP channels, such as TRPA1, TRPV1, TRPV3, and TRPV4, in the gut of croton
oil-treated mice (De Petrocellis et al. 2012; Izzo et al. 2012). Overall, the in vivo ability of both
CBC and CBD to normalize motility in the inflamed gut, without slowing the rate of transit in
healthy animals, is of potential clinical interest since currently used antidiarrheal agents are often
associated with constipating effects.
Finally, Lin and colleagues found that CBD normalized hypomotility and inflammatory
responses in the LPS mouse model of septic ileus (Lin et al. 2011). The possibility that CBD acts
as a systemic anti-inflammatory agent in this model of intestinal dysfunction cannot be ruled out
(Lin et al. 2011).
12.3.8 Colon cancer

Cannabinoids exert antiproliferative, antimetastatic, and proapoptotic actions in colorectal carcinoma epithelial cells (Izzo and Camilleri 2009). In experimental in vivo models of colon cancer,
cannabinoid agonists might be protective in different stages of colon cancer progression either
directly, through activation of CB1 or CB2 receptors, or indirectly, through elevation of endocannabinoid levels via FAAH inhibition (Cianchi et al. 2008; Izzo et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2008). Their
antitumor actions may be mediated by either CB1 or CB2 receptor activation (Izzo and Camilleri
2009). The mechanism of CB1-mediated apoptosis involves inhibition of both the RAS–MAPK/
ERK and PI3K–Akt survival signaling cascades and downregulation of the antiapoptotic factor
survivin. The proapoptotic lipid ceramide could be involved in both CB1- and CB2-mediated
antitumor effects (Izzo and Camilleri 2009).
Recently, the phytocannabinoid CBD has been evaluated for its possible chemopreventive effect
in a murine model of colon cancer induced by the carcinogenic agent azoxymethane (AOM).
CBD effectively reduced AOM-induced preneoplastic lesions, polyps and tumors in the colon, an

235

236

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

effect that was associated with downregulation of phospho-Akt and upregulation of caspase-3.
Studies on colorectal carcinoma cells suggested that CBD protected DNA damage caused by an
oxidative insult and exerted antiproliferative effects through multiple mechanisms, including
involvement of CB1 receptors, TRPV1 and PPARγ (Aviello et al. 2012).
The oxidation of cannabis constituents leads to the formation of the corresponding quinones,
which have been demonstrated to be cytotoxic agents. The quinone of CBD, named HU-331,
exerts antiangiogenic and proapoptotic properties and also inhibits topoisomerase II (Peters and
Kogan 2007). Unlike other quinones, it is not cardiotoxic and does not induce the formation of
free radicals. A comparative in vivo study in mice has shown HU-331 to be less toxic and more
effective than doxorubicin in a nude mouse HT-29 colon carcinoma model (Kogan et al. 2007).

12.4 Clinical studies
12.4.1 Gastrointestinal motility, visceral sensation, and IBS

Visceral hypersensitivity to distension and altered GI motility are thought to play an important
role in the pathophysiology of the irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Both visceral sensation and
GI motility have been evaluated in human volunteers after THC administration. Thus, nine
male and four female experienced cannabis users underwent gastric emptying studies that used
radiolabeled solid food as a marker, after they had received THC (at a dose of 10 mg/m2 of body
surface area) or placebo. Gastric emptying after THC was slower than after placebo in all subjects.
However, no correlation was found between plasma THC levels and the delay in gastric emptying.
The authors concluded that THC, at a dose that can prevent chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting, significantly delayed gastric emptying of solid food in humans (McCallum et al. 1999).
The inhibitory effect of THC on gastric emptying has been confirmed more recently by Esfandyari
and colleagues, in a randomized, double-blind study performed with 30 healthy volunteers who
received THC (5 mg twice a day) or placebo. Gastric emptying was measured noninvasively. An
overall retardation of gastric emptying with THC compared to placebo was observed, the effect
being more pronounced in females than in males (Esfandyari et al. 2006).
In a further randomized, double-blind trial, Esfandyari and colleagues assessed colonic compliance, motility, tone, and sensation in 52 volunteers who had received a single dose of 7.5 mg THC.
An overall significant increase in colonic compliance, a borderline effect on relaxation in fasting
colonic tone, inhibition of postprandial colonic tone, and inhibition of fasting and postprandial
phasic pressure was observed. Collectively, the results suggest that THC relaxes the colon and
reduces postprandial colonic motility and tone in humans (Esfandyari et al. 2007).
More recently, Wong and colleagues compared the effects of THC (5 mg) with those of placebo
on colonic motility and sensation in patients with IBS, and also conducted a pharmacogenetic
analysis that explored the influence of genetic variation in the CB1 receptor, FAAH and MAGL on
the ability of THC to alter diarrhea and colonic transit in IBS with diarrhea patients (Wong et al.
2011). In all patients (35 with IBS with constipation, 35 with IBS with diarrhea, and 5 with alternating IBS) THC did not alter sensation or tone but decreased the fasting proximal left colonic
motility index compared with placebo, and increased colonic compliance. The effects of THC
were greatest in patients with IBS with diarrhea or with alternating IBS. FAAH and CNR1 variants influenced the effect of THC on colonic motility (Wong et al. 2011). In a subsequent study,
the same authors found that THC (2.5 and 5 mg) had no effect on gut transit in IBS patients with
diarrhea, although a treatment-by-genotype effect was observed, whereby THC preferentially
delayed colonic transit in patients with the CNR1 rs806378 CT/TT genotypes (Wong et al. 2012).

Phytocannabinoids and the Gastrointestinal System

Finally, Klooker and colleagues evaluated the effect of THC on rectal sensitivity in ten IBS
patients and 12 healthy volunteers. THC did not alter baseline rectal perception to distension
compared to placebo either in volunteers or in IBS patients. Similarly, after sigmoid stimulation
there were no significant differences between placebo and THC in sensory thresholds of discomfort (Klooker et al. 2011).
In conclusion, studies in humans suggest that THC may affect gastric emptying and colonic
motility in healthy and/or IBS patients, particularly in a subset of IBS with diarrhea patients,
based on a specific genetic variation in the CB1 receptor. Further studies of cannabinoid pharmacogenetics could identify a subset of IBS with diarrhea patients in which cannabinoid therapy
may be effective. Conversely, THC does not seem to affect visceral perception in humans, a result
which illustrates the importance of doing translational studies when investigating a possible clinical use of a cannabinoid.
12.4.2 Inflammatory bowel disease

Some IBD patients anecdotally report that they can obtain relief by smoking marijuana. Recently,
three studies, by showing beneficial effects of cannabis use in humans, seem to confirm such
reports.
Naftali and colleagues performed a retrospective observational study examining disease activity, use of medication, need for surgery before and after cannabis use in 30 Crohn’s disease (CD)
patients (26 males). Of the 30 patients, 21 improved significantly after treatment with cannabis.
The need for other medication was significantly reduced and the number of patients requiring
surgery decreased during cannabis use (Naftali et al. 2011).
Lal and colleagues evaluated cannabis use in 291 IBD patients, who completed a questionnaire
regarding current and previous cannabis use. About 50% of these IBD patients, particularly those
with a history of abdominal surgery, chronic abdominal pain and/or a low quality of life, reported
lifetime or current cannabis use. Patients who had used cannabis were more likely than nonusers to express an interest in participating in a hypothetical therapeutic trial of cannabis for IBD.
Collectively such results suggest that cannabis use for symptom relief is common in patients with
IBD (Lal et al. 2011).
Finally, a pilot prospective study involving 13 patients with long-standing IBD assessed whether
treatment with inhaled cannabis (cigarettes) improved quality of life, reduced disease activity, and
promoted weight gain in IBD patients. After 3 months’ treatment, patients reported improvement
in general health perception, social functioning, ability to work, pain, and depression. cannabis
also promoted weight gain and induced a rise in body mass index (Lahat et al. 2012).

12.6 Conclusions
There is anecdotal evidence, spanning many centuries, that cannabis is therapeutically beneficial
for a variety of human GI disease conditions. Recently, however, in-depth research efforts have
begun to document the detailed pharmacological actions of specific plant-derived cannabinoids,
which have been shown to modulate several critically important functions in the GI tract (e.g.,
motility, sensation, inflammation, tissue proliferation, and carcinogenesis). The resurgence of
interest in the study of plant-based cannabinoids has probably been encouraged by the approval of
Sativex® for the treatment of multiple sclerosis spasticity and pain. Concerning the GI tract, areas
of major interest are those related to widespread diseases such as IBS, IBD, and colon cancer and,
at least for IBD and IBS, promising, albeit preliminary, clinical data are already available.

237

238

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

The challenge now is to achieve a favorable balance between the beneficial effects of cannabinoids on GI disorders and the unwanted effects that can result from CB1 receptor activation, for
example, by focusing on the particularly promising potential approach of exploiting the apparent
ability of nonpsychoactive plant cannabinoids to ameliorate GI disorders.

References
Adami, M., Frati, P., Bertini, S., et al. (2002). Gastric antisecretory role and immunohistochemical localization of cannabinoid receptors in the rat stomach. British Journal of Pharmacology, 135, 598–606.
Adami, M., Zamfirova, R., Sotirov, E., et al. (2004). Gastric antisecretory effects of synthetic cannabinoids
after central or peripheral administration in the rat. Brain Research Bulletin, 64, 357–361.
Alhouayek, M., Lambert, D.M., Delzenne, N.M., et al. (2011). Increasing endogenous
2-­arachidonoylglycerol levels counteracts colitis and related systemic inflammation. FASEB Journal, 25,
2711–2721.
Alhouayek, M. and Muccioli, G.G. (2012). The endocannabinoid system in inflammatory bowel diseases:
from pathophysiology to therapeutic opportunity. Trends in Molecular Medicine, 18, 615–625.
Alhamoruni, A., Lee, A.C., Wright, K.L., et al. (2010). Pharmacological effects of cannabinoids on
the Caco-2 cell culture model of intestinal permeability. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, 335, 92–102.
Alhamoruni, A., Wright, K.L., Larvin, M., and O’Sullivan, S.E. (2012). Cannabinoids mediate opposing effects on inflammation-induced intestinal permeability. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165,
2598–2610.
Anderson, P.F., Jackson, D.M., and Chesher, G.B. (1974). Interaction of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol and
cannabidiol on intestinal motility in mice. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 26, 136–137.
Appendino, G., Chianese, G., and Taglialatela-Scafati O. (2011). Cannabinoids: occurrence and medicinal
chemistry. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 18, 1085–1099.
Aviello, G., Romano, B., and Borrelli, F., et al. (2012). Chemopreventive effect of the non-psychotropic
phytocannabinoid cannabidiol on experimental colon cancer. Journal of Molecular Medicine, 90, 925–934.
Aviello, G., Romano, B., and Izzo, A.A. (2008). Cannabinoids and gastrointestinal motility: animal and
human studies. European Review for Medical and Pharmacological Sciences, 12(Suppl. 1), 81–93.
Bashashati, M., Storr, M.A., and Nikas, S.P. (2012). Inhibiting fatty acid amide hydrolase normalizes
endotoxin-induced enhanced gastrointestinal motility in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165,
1556–1571.
Beaumont, H., Jensen, J., Carlsson, A., Ruth, M., Lehmann, A., and Boeckxstaens, G. (2009). Effect
of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, a cannabinoid receptor agonist, on the triggering of transient
lower oesophageal sphincter relaxations in dogs and humans. British Journal of Pharmacology, 156,
153–162.
Bento, A.F., Marcon, R., Dutra, R.C., et al. (2011). β-Caryophyllene inhibits dextran sulfate sodiuminduced colitis in mice through CB2 receptor activation and PPARγ pathway. American Journal of
Pathology, 178, 1153–1166.
Bisogno, T., Hanus, L., De Petrocellis, L., et al. (2001). Molecular targets for cannabidiol and its synthetic
analogues: effect on vanilloid VR1 receptors and on the cellular uptake and enzymatic hydrolysis of
anandamide. British Journal of Pharmacology, 134, 845–852.
Boesmans, W., Owsianik, G., Tack, J., Voets, T., and Vanden Berghe, P. (2011). TRP channels in neurogastroenterology: opportunities for therapeutic intervention. British Journal of Pharmacology, 162,
18–37.
Bolognini, D., Costa, B., Maione, S., et al. (2010). The plant cannabinoid Delta9- tetrahydrocannabivarin
can decrease signs of inflammation and inflammatory pain in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology,
160, 677–87.

Phytocannabinoids and the Gastrointestinal System

Booker, L., Naidu, P.S., Razdan, R.K., Mahadevan, A., and Lichtman, A.H. (2009). Evaluation of prevalent
phytocannabinoids in the acetic acid model of visceral nociception. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 105,
42–47.
Borrelli, F. (2007). Cannabinoid CB1 receptor and gastric acid secretion. Digestive Disease and Sciences, 52,
3102–3103.
Borrelli, F., Aviello, G., Romano, B., et al. (2009). Cannabidiol, a safe and non-psychotropic ingredient
of the marijuana plant Cannabis sativa, is protective in a murine model of colitis. Journal of Molecular
Medicine, 87, 1111–1121.
Borrelli, F. and Izzo, A.A. (2009). Role of acylethanolamides in the gastrointestinal tract with special
reference to food intake and energy balance. Best Practice and Research Clinical Endocrinology and
Metabolism, 23, 33–49.
Borrelli, F., Fasolino, I., Romano, B., et al. (2013). Beneficial effect of the non-psychotropic plant cannabinoid cannabigerol on experimental inflammatory bowel disease. Biochemical Pharmacology, 85,
1306–1316.
Capasso, R., Borrelli, F., Aviello, G., et al. (2008a). Cannabidiol, extracted from Cannabis sativa, selectively
inhibits inflammatory hypermotility in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 154, 1001–1008.
Capasso, R., Borrelli, F., Cascio, M.G., et al. (2008b). Inhibitory effect of salvinorin A, from Salvia divinorum, on ileitis-induced hypermotility: cross-talk between kappa-opioid and cannabinoid CB1 receptors.
British Journal of Pharmacology, 155, 681–689.
Capasso, R. and Izzo, A.A. (2008). Gastrointestinal regulation of food intake: general aspects and focus on
anandamide and oleoylethanolamide. Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 20(Suppl. 1), 39–46.
Capasso, R., Izzo, A.A., Fezza, F., et al. (2001). Inhibitory effect of palmitoylethanolamide on gastrointestinal motility in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 134, 945–950.
Chesher, G.B., Dahl, C.J., Everingham, M., et al. (1973). The effect of cannabinoids on intestinal motility
and their antinociceptive effect in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 49, 588–594.
Cianchi, F., Papucci, L., Schiavone, N., et al. (2008). Cannabinoid receptor activation induces apoptosis
through tumor necrosis factor alpha-mediated ceramide de novo synthesis in colon cancer cells. Clinical
Cancer Research, 14, 7691–7700.
Cluny, N.L., Keenan, C.M., Duncan, M., Fox, A., Lutz, B., and Sharkey, K.A. (2010). Naphthalen-1-yl-(4pentyloxynaphthalen-1-yl)methanone (SAB378), a peripherally restricted cannabinoid CB1/CB2 receptor agonist, inhibits gastrointestinal motility but has no effect on experimental colitis in mice. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 334, 973–980.
Coruzzi, G., Adami, M., Guaita, E., et al. (2006). Effects of cannabinoid receptor agonists on rat gastric
acid secretion: discrepancy between in vitro and in vivo data. Digestive Disease and Sciences, 51, 310–
317.
Coupar, I.M. and Taylor, D.A. (1983). Effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on prostaglandin concentrations and fluid absorption rates in the rat small intestine. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 35,
392–394.
D’Argenio, G., Valenti, M., Scaglione, G., Cosenza, V., Sorrentini, I., and Di Marzo, V. (2006).
Up-regulation of anandamide levels as an endogenous mechanism and a pharmacological strategy to
limit colon inflammation. FASEB Journal, 20, 568–570.
De Filippis, D., Esposito, G., Cirillo, C., et al. (2011). Cannabidiol reduces intestinal inflammation through
the control of neuroimmune axis. PLoS One, 6, e28159.
De Filippis, D., Iuvone, T., D’amico, A., et al. (2008). Effect of cannabidiol on sepsis-induced motility disturbances in mice: involvement of CB receptors and fatty acid amide hydrolase. Neurogastroenterology
and Motility, 20, 919–927.
De Petrocellis, L., Ligresti, A., and Moriello, A.S. (2011). Effects of cannabinoids and cannabinoidenriched Cannabis extracts on TRP channels and endocannabinoid metabolic enzymes. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 163, 1479–1494.

239

240

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

De Petrocellis, L., Orlando, P., Moriello, A.S., et al. (2012). Cannabinoid actions at TRPV channels: effects
on TRPV3 and TRPV4 and their potential relevance to gastrointestinal inflammation. Acta Physiologica,
204, 255–266.
De Souza, H., Trajano, E., de Carvalho, F.V., and Palermo Neto, J. (1978). Effects of acute and long-term
cannabis treatment of restraint-induced gastric ulceration in rats. Japanese Journal of Pharmacology, 28,
507–510.
Dembiński, A., Warzecha, Z., Ceranowicz, P., et al. (2006). Cannabinoids in acute gastric damage and
pancreatitis. Journal of Physiology Pharmacology, 57(Suppl. 5), 137–154.
Dewey, W.L., Harris, L.S., and Kennedy, J.S. (1972). Some pharmacological and toxicological effects
of 1-trans-8 and 1-trans-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in laboratory rodents. Archives Internationales de
Pharmacodynamie et de Thérapie, 196, 133–145.
Di Marzo, V., Capasso, R., Matias, I., et al. (2008). The role of endocannabinoids in the regulation
of gastric emptying: alterations in mice fed a high-fat diet. British Journal of Pharmacology, 153,
1272–1280.
Di Sabatino, A., Battista, N., Biancheri, P., et al. (2011). The endogenous cannabinoid system in the gut of
patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Mucosal Immunology, 4, 574–583.
Duncan, M., Davison, J.S., and Sharkey, K.A. (2005). Review article: endocannabinoids and their receptors
in the enteric nervous system. Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 22, 667–683.
Duncan, M., Mouihate, A., Mackie, K., et al. (2008a). Cannabinoid CB2 receptors in the enteric nervous
system modulate gastrointestinal contractility in lipopolysaccharide-treated rats. American Journal of
Physiology – Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 295, G78–G87.
Duncan, M. Thomas, A.D., Cluny, N.L., et al. (2008b). Distribution and function of monoacylglycerol lipase in the gastrointestinal tract. American Journal of Physiology – Gastrointestinal and Liver
Physiology, 295, G1255–G1265.
Engel, M.A., Kellermann, C.A., Burnat, G., et al. (2010). Mice lacking cannabinoid CB1-, CB2-receptors
or both receptors show increased susceptibility to trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced colitis.
Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 61, 89–97.
Engel, M.A., Kellermann, C.A., Rau, T., Burnat, G., Hahn, E.G., and Konturek, P.C. (2008). Ulcerative
colitis in AKR mice is attenuated by intraperitoneally administered anandamide. Journal of Physiology
and Pharmacology, 59, 673–689.
Esfandyari, T., Camilleri, M., Busciglio, I., Burton, D., Baxter, K. and Zinsmeister, A.R. (2007). Effects
of a cannabinoid receptor agonist on colonic motor and sensory functions in humans: a randomized,
placebo-controlled study. American Journal of Physiology – Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 293,
G137–G145.
Esfandyari, T., Camilleri, M., Ferber, I., Burton, D., Baxter, K. and Zinsmeister, A.R. (2006). Effect of a
cannabinoid agonist on gastrointestinal transit and postprandial satiation in healthy human subjects: a
randomized, placebo-controlled study. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 18, 831–838.
Germanò, M.P., D’Angelo, V., Mondello, M.R., et al. (2001). Cannabinoid CB1-mediated inhibition of
stress-induced gastric ulcers in rats. Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Archives of Pharmacology, 363, 241–244.
Izzo, A.A. (2004). Cannabinoids and intestinal motility: welcome to CB2 receptors. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 142, 1201–1202.
Izzo, A.A., Aviello, G., Petrosino, S., et al. (2008). Increased endocannabinoid levels reduce the development of precancerous lesions in the mouse colon. Journal of Molecular Medicine, 86, 89–98.
Izzo, A.A., Borrelli, F. Capasso, R., Di Marzo, V., and Mechoulam, R .(2009). Non-psychotropic plant
cannabinoids: new therapeutic opportunities from an ancient herb. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences,
30, 515–527.
Izzo, A.A. and Camilleri, M. (2009). Cannabinoids in intestinal inflammation and cancer. Pharmacological
Research, 60, 117–125.

Phytocannabinoids and the Gastrointestinal System

Izzo, A.A, Capasso, R., Aviello, G., et al. (2012). Inhibitory effect of cannabichromene, a major nonpsychotropic cannabinoid extracted from Cannabis sativa, on inflammation-induced hypermotility in
mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 166, 1444–1460.
Izzo, A.A., Capasso, F., Costagliola, A., et al. (2003). An endogenous cannabinoid tone attenuates cholera
toxin-induced fluid accumulation in mice. Gastroenterology, 125, 765–774.
Izzo, A.A. and Coutts, A.A. (2005). Cannabinoids and the digestive tract. Handbook of Experimental
Pharmacology, 168, 573–598.
Izzo, A.A., Fezza, F., Capasso, R., et al. (2001). Cannabinoid CB1-receptor mediated regulation of gastrointestinal motility in mice in a model of intestinal inflammation. British Journal of Pharmacology, 134,
563–570.
Izzo, A.A., Pinto, L., Borrelli, F., Capasso, R., Mascolo, N. and Capasso, F. (2000). Central and peripheral cannabinoid modulation of gastrointestinal transit in physiological states or during the diarrhoea
induced by croton oil. British Journal of Pharmacology, 129, 1627–1632.
Izzo, A.A. and Sharkey, K.A. (2010). Cannabinoids and the gut: new developments and emerging concepts.
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 126, 21–38.
Jackson, D.M., Malor, R., Chesher, G.B., Starmer, G.A., Welburn, P.J., and Bailey, R. (1976). The interaction between prostaglandin E1 and delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol on intestinal motility and on the
abdominal constriction response in the mouse. Psychopharmacologia, 47, 187–193.
Jamontt, J.M., Molleman, A., Pertwee, R.G., and Parsons, M.E. (2010). The effects of Deltatetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol alone and in combination on damage, inflammation and in vitro
motility disturbances in rat colitis. British Journal of Pharmacology, 160, 712–723.
Kimball, E.S., Schneider, C.R. Wallace, N.H., and Hornby, P.J. (2006). Agonists of cannabinoid receptor
1 and 2 inhibit experimental colitis induced by oil of mustard and by dextran sulfate sodium. American
Journal of Physiology – Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 291, G364–G371.
Kimball, E.S., Wallace, N.H., Schneider, C.R, D’Andrea, M.R., and Hornby, P.J. (2010). Small intestinal
cannabinoid receptor changes following a single colonic insult with oil of mustard in mice. Frontiers in
Pharmacology, 1, 132.
Kinsey, S.G., Nomura, D.K. and O’Neal, S.T., et al. (2011). Inhibition of monoacylglycerol lipase
attenuates nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced gastric hemorrhages in mice. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 338, 795–802.
Klooker, T.K., Leliefeld, K.E., Van Den Wijngaard, R.M., and Boeckxstaens, G.E. (2011). The cannabinoid receptor agonist delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol does not affect visceral sensitivity to rectal distension in healthy volunteers and IBS patients. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 23, 30–5e2.
Kogan, N.M., Schlesinger, M., Peters, M., Marincheva, G., Beeri, R., and Mechoulam, R. (2007). A cannabinoid anticancer quinone, HU-331, is more potent and less cardiotoxic than doxorubicin: a comparative in vivo study. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 322, 646–653.
Krowicki, Z.K., Moerschbaecher, J.M., Winsauer, P.J., Digavalli, S.V., and Hornby, P.J. (1999). Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol inhibits gastric motility in the rat through cannabinoid CB1 receptors. European
Journal of Pharmacology, 371, 187–196.
Lahat, A., Lang, A., and Ben-Horin, S. (2012). Impact of cannabis treatment on the quality of life, weight
and clinical disease activity in inflammatory bowel disease patients: a pilot prospective study. Digestion,
85, 1–8.
Lal, S., Prasad, N., Ryan, M., et al. (2011). Cannabis use amongst patients with inflammatory bowel disease. European Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 23, 891–896.
Lehmann, A., Blackshaw, L.A., and Brändén, L. (2002). Cannabinoid receptor agonism inhibits transient
lower esophageal sphincter relaxations and reflux in dogs. Gastroenterology, 123, 1129–1134.
Lin, X.H., Yuece, B., Li, Y.Y., et al. (2011). A novel CB receptor GPR55 and its ligands are involved in regulation of gut movement in rodents. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 23, 862–e342.

241

242

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

MacNaughton, W.K., Van Sickle, M.D., Keenan, C.M., Cushing, K., Mackie, K., and Sharkey, K.A.
(2004). Distribution and function of the cannabinoid-1 receptor in the modulation of ion transport
in the guinea pig ileum: relationship to capsaicin-sensitive nerves. American Journal of Physiology –
Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 286, G863–G871.
Makwana, R., Molleman, A., and Parsons, M.E. (2010). Pharmacological characterization of cannabinoid
receptor activity in the rat-isolated ileum myenteric plexus-longitudinal muscle preparation. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 159, 1608–1622.
Marquéz, L., Suárez, J., Iglesias, M., Bermudez-Silva, F.J., Rodríguez de Fonseca, F., and Andreu, M.
(2009). Ulcerative colitis induces changes on the expression of the endocannabinoid system in the
human colonic tissue. PLoS One, 4, e6893.
Massa, F., Marsicano, G., Hermann, H., et al. (2004). The endogenous cannabinoid system protects against
colonic inflammation. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 113, 1202–1209.
Mathison, R., Ho, W., Pittman, Q.J., Davison, J.S., and Sharkey, K.A. (2004). Effects of cannabinoid
receptor-2 activation on accelerated gastrointestinal transit in lipopolysaccharide-treated rats. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 142, 1247–1254.
McCallum, R.W., Soykan, I., Sridhar, K.R., Ricci, D.A., Lange, R.C., and Plankey, M.W. (1999). Delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol delays the gastric emptying of solid food in humans: a double-blind, randomized
study. Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 13, 77–80.
Naftali, T., Lev, L.B., Yablecovitch, D., Half, E., and Konikoff, F.M. (2011). Treatment of Crohn’s disease
with cannabis: an observational study. Israel Medical Association Journal, 13, 455–458.
Naidu, P.S., Booker, L., Cravatt, B.F., and Lichtman, A.H. (2009). Synergy between enzyme inhibitors of
fatty acid amide hydrolase and cyclooxygenase in visceral nociception. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 329, 48–56.
Partosoedarso, E.R., Abrahams, T.P., Scullion, R.T., Moerschbaecher, J.M., and Hornby, P.J. (2003).
Cannabinoid1 receptor in the dorsal vagal complex modulates lower oesophageal sphincter relaxation
in ferrets. Journal of Physiology, 550, 149–158.
Pazos, M.R., Tolón, R.M., Benito, C., et al. (2008). Cannabinoid CB1 receptors are expressed by parietal
cells of the human gastric mucosa. Journal of Histochemistry and Cytochemistry, 56, 511–516.
Pertwee, R.G. (2008). The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology of three plant cannabinoids:
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 153, 199–215.
Pertwee, R.G., Fernando, S.R., Nash, J.E. and Coutts, A.A. (1996). Further evidence for the presence
of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in guinea-pig small intestine. British Journal of Pharmacology, 118,
2199–2205.
Pertwee, R.G., Stevenson, L.A., Elrick, D.B., Mechoulam, R., and Corbett, A.D. (1992). Inhibitory effects
of certain enantiomeric cannabinoids in the mouse vas deferens and the myenteric plexus preparation
of guinea-pig small intestine. British Journal of Pharmacology, 105, 980–984.
Peters, M. and Kogan, N.M. (2007). HU-331: a cannabinoid quinone, with uncommon cytotoxic properties
and low toxicity. Expert Opinion on Investigational Drugs, 16, 1405–1413.
Pinto, L, Capasso, R., Di Carlo, G., and Izzo, A.A. (2002a). Endocannabinoids and the gut. Prostaglandins,
Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids, 66, 333–341.
Pinto, L., Izzo, A.A., Cascio, M.G., et al. (2002b). Endocannabinoids as physiological regulators of colonic
propulsion in mice. Gastroenterology, 123, 227–234.
Pol, O. and Puig, M.M. (1997). Reversal of tolerance to the antitransit effects of morphine during acute
intestinal inflammation in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 122, 1216–1222.
Riedel, G., Fadda, P., McKillop-Smith, S., Pertwee, R.G., Platt, B., and Robinson, L. (2009). Synthetic and
plant-derived cannabinoid receptor antagonists show hypophagic properties in fasted and non-fasted
mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 156, 1154–1166.

Phytocannabinoids and the Gastrointestinal System

Rivas, V. and Josè, F. (1980). Inhibition of histamine-stimulated gastric acid secretion by delta9-­
tetrahydrocannabinol in rat isolated stomach. European Journal of Pharmacology, 65, 317–318.
Romano, B., Borrelli, F., Fasolino, I., et al. (2013). The cannabinoid TRPA1 agonist cannabichromene
inhibits nitric oxide production in macrophages and ameliorates murine colitis. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 169, 213–229.
Ross, G.R., Lichtman, A., Dewey, W.L., and Akbarali, H.I. (2012). Evidence for the putative cannabinoid
receptor (GPR55)-mediated inhibitory effects on intestinal contractility in mice. Pharmacology, 90,
55–65.
Ross, R.A., Brockie, H.C., Fernando, S.R., Saha, B., Razdan, R.K., and Pertwee, R.G. (1998).
Comparison of cannabinoid binding sites in guinea-pig forebrain and small intestine. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 125, 1345–1351.
Rutkowska, M. and Fereniec-Gołebiewska, L. (2009). Involvement of nitric oxide in the gastroprotective
effect of ACEA, a selective cannabinoid CB1 receptor agonist, on aspirin-induced gastric ulceration.
Pharmazie, 64, 595–597.
Sasso, O., Bertorelli, R., and Bandiera, T. (2012). Peripheral FAAH inhibition causes profound antinociception and protects against indomethacin-induced gastric lesions. Pharmacological Research, 65,
553–563.
Scarpellini, E., Blondeau, K., and Boecxstaens, V. (2011). Effect of rimonabant on oesophageal motor
function in man. Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 33, 730–737.
Schicho, R. and Storr, M. (2012). Topical and systemic cannabidiol improves trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid
colitis in mice. Pharmacology, 89, 149–155.
Shook, J.E. and Burks, T.F. (1989). Psychoactive cannabinoids reduce gastrointestinal propulsion and
motility in rodents. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 249, 444–449.
Shook, J.E., Dewey, W.L., and Burks, T.F. (1986). The central and peripheral effects of delta-9-­
tetrahydrocannabinol on gastrointestinal transit in mice. NIDA Research Monograph, 67, 222–227.
Singh, U.P., Singh, N.P., Singh, B., Price, R.L., Nagarkatti, M., and Nagarkatti, P.S. (2012). Cannabinoid
receptor-2 (CB2) agonist ameliorates colitis in IL-10−/− mice by attenuating the activation of T cells and
promoting their apoptosis. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 258, 256–267.
Sofia, R.D., Diamantis, W., and Edelson, J. (1978). Effect of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on the gastrointestinal tract of the rat. Pharmacology, 17, 79–82.
Sofia, R.D., Vassar, H.B., and Knobloch, L.C. (1975). Comparative analgesic activity of various naturally
occurring cannabinoids in mice and rats. Psychopharmacologia, 40, 285–295.
Storr, M.A., Keenan, C.M., and Emmerdinger, D. (2008). Targeting endocannabinoid degradation protects against experimental colitis in mice: involvement of CB1 and CB2 receptors. Journal of Molecular
Medicine, 86, 925–936.
Storr, M.A., Keenan, C.M., Zhang, H., Patel, K.D., Makriyannis, A., and Sharkey, K.A. (2009). Activation
of the cannabinoid 2 receptor (CB2) protects against experimental colitis. Inflammatory Bowel Disease,
15, 1678–1685.
Storr, M.A., Bashashati, M. and Hirota, C., et al. (2010). Differential effects of CB1 neutral antagonists and
inverse agonists on gastrointestinal motility in mice. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 22, 787–796,
e223.
Thomas, A., Baillie, G.L., Phillips, A.M., Razdan, R.K., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2007). Cannabidiol
displays unexpectedly high potency as an antagonist of CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists in vitro. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 613–623.
Tyler, K., Hillard, C.J., and Greenwood-Van Meerveld B. (2000). Inhibition of small intestinal secretion by
cannabinoids is CB1 receptor-mediated in rats. European Journal of Pharmacology, 409, 207–211.
Wang, D., Wang, H., Ning, W., et al. (2008). Loss of cannabinoid receptor 1 accelerates intestinal tumor
growth. Cancer Research, 68, 6468–6476.

243

244

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Warzecha, Z., Dembinski, A., and Ceranowicz, P. (2011). Role of sensory nerves in gastroprotective effect
of anandamide in rats. Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 62, 207–217.
Wong, B.S., Camilleri, M., Busciglio, I., et al. (2011). Pharmacogenetic trial of a cannabinoid agonist
shows reduced fasting colonic motility in patients with nonconstipated irritable bowel syndrome.
Gastroenterology, 141, 1638–1647.
Wong, B.S., Camilleri, M., Eckert, D., et al. (2012). Randomized pharmacodynamic and pharmacogenetic
trial of dronabinol effects on colon transit in irritable bowel syndrome-diarrhea. Neurogastroenterology
and Motility, 24, 358–e169.
Wright, K., Rooney, N., Feeney, M., et al. (2005). Differential expression of cannabinoid receptors in the
human colon: cannabinoids promote epithelial wound healing. Gastroenterology, 129, 437–453.
Wright, K.L., Duncan, M. and Sharkey, K.A. (2008). Cannabinoid CB2 receptors in the gastrointestinal
tract: a regulatory system in states of inflammation. British Journal of Pharmacology, 153, 263–270.

Chapter 13

Reproduction and Cannabinoids:
Ups and Downs, Ins and Outs
Jordyn M. Stuart, Emma Leishman,
and Heather B. Bradshaw

13.1 Introduction
According to Wikipedia, reproduction is “the biological process by which new ‘offspring’ individual organisms are produced from their ‘parents.’ Reproduction is a fundamental feature of
all known life; each individual organism exists as the result of reproduction.” This seems simple
enough; however, the suite of biological, psychological, and social influences of this simple process within the human species has arguably been the basis for many of life’s greatest triumphs and
defeats. Reproduction sciences span from conception to development (including in utero through
puberty and adulthood) to andropause and menopause. From the purely basic science standpoint, it is often argued that there are “reproductive” and “nonreproductive” areas of the brain
and body; however, it can also be argued that the myriad of processes that drive reproduction
require (or hijack) all of the body and mind. Indeed circuitry that drives sexual motivation is the
same that provides the rewarding effects of psychoactive drugs. Therefore, when approaching the
topic of cannabinoids and reproduction one could take the view of how basic biology is affected,
such as focusing on cannabinoids and the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal (HPG) axis and the
reproductive tracts. However, the focus on the sensual aspects of reproduction cannot truly be
discussed outside of the social/cultural view of reproduction and the range of freedoms and constraints that are imposed among different societies and how that plays a role in or is mirrored in
cannabinoid use. In working on the integration of these points of view we draw on an ideology of
our field (neuroscience) that posits that everything psychological is simultaneously biological. This
phrase defines the understanding that there can be no behavior, thought, or feeling that is not a
result of the biological activity of the body and brain. Here, we will review what is known about
the biological role of the cannabinoid system in the context of sexuality, how that likely drives the
outcomes of cannabinoid use in both the functional and sensual aspects of sexuality, and how this
may differ in the context of gender and culture.

13.2 Cannabis as an aphrodisiac?
Folklore of cannabis use as an aphrodisiac has been passed down for thousands of years. One of
the earliest stories is told within Hindu mythology. The story states that what we know now as
psychoactive hemp, the plant most associated with the deity Shiva, was linked with his persona
characterized with eroticism, asceticism, and healing. It was thought, “the gods gave humans
hemp out of compassion so that they could attain enlightenment, lose their fear, and maintain
their sexual excitement” (Rätsch 2001). In other cultures, such as Ukraine, young girls were said

246

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

to use hemp seeds as an aphrodisiac. They referred to hemp as “love magic,” and thought that the
wetting of the seeds with water in their mouths “would result in the pursuit of a bed partner and
disrobed frolicking” (Rätsch 2001). In Tibet, it was believed that hemp’s aphrodisiac properties
could be exploited to treat mental illness; the idea being that the increase in sexual activity would
help heal the mind (Rätsch 2001). Still, as with many myths and folklore, it is impossible to determine which came first: the story of the gods’ involvement in the use of cannabis or the use of cannabis, which was then attributed and “legitimized” by the story of the gods. Either way, multiple
societies have been documented in their associations with cannabis use for socialization rites and
rituals, including sexuality, which in itself provides reliability if not validity.
Inherent in the discussion of sex and drugs is the belief that there is a direct relationship between
the risky uses of both. Indeed, there is some correlation between the two. A survey of 8656 people
found that frequent users of cannabis were more likely to report two or more sexual partners
within the year before the interview was conducted. It also found that female cannabis users were
more likely to have contracted a sexually transmitted disease than noncannabis-smoking women
(Smith et al. 2010). Another survey, done on a population of HIV-positive German men who
had sex with other men, showed a significant correlation between cannabis use and risky sexual
behavior, including unprotected anal intercourse (Dirks et al. 2012). While it is very possible that
those who are phenotypically more prone to generalized risk would be more likely to engage in all
risky behaviors, it is also possible that the motivational aspects of sex could be acting synergistically to increase the likelihood of those risks involved with sex and drugs.
Although it has been suggested that cannabis was used as a libido enhancer since ancient times,
it was not until the 1970s that more data on how cannabis use actually affected sexual function
became more widely available through published papers. Surveys of men and women, using
self-reported recall, were used to examine correlations between sexual experiences and cannabis use (Gorzalka et al. 2010). In these early studies, women typically reported increased sexual
responsiveness, specifically heightened sensitivity to touch and relaxation. Yet, they did not report
a simultaneous effect on vaginal lubrication, orgasm frequency, or orgasm strength (Gorzalka
et al. 2010). Koff has proposed a dose-dependent effect of cannabis on female sexual desire. When
participants reported only smoking one cannabis joint, 71% of females reported an increase in
sexual motivation, yet the same females indicated a decrease in sexual desire after smoking more
than one joint (Koff 1974). Another study in 1982 found a positive correlation between female
cannabis use and sexual pleasure. After smoking cannabis, 90% of women reported their sexual
experience was more satisfying and 40% reported having improved orgasm quality. The population of the respondents self-identified as regular marijuana users, meaning that they had used
marijuana on more than 50 separate occasions during a time period lasting more than 6 months.
In fact, the average duration of marijuana use at that time was more than 2 years, with an average
frequency of two to three times per week (Halikas et al. 1982). Therefore, there may be a phenotype of this population that makes these comparisons suspect. For example, could the increase in
pleasure be an effect of a decrease in potential withdrawal symptoms from lack of use? Could their
HPG axis be altered by chronic cannabis use such that there is a maladaptation of this circuitry
that then requires the use of cannabis to re-engage this access? Or, did these individuals adapt
to the chronic use of cannabis for another reason all together (e.g., relief of pain, posttraumatic
stress disorder) and the side effect of the perception of heightened sexual pleasure added to the
therapeutic effects?
Perceptions of heightened sexual experiences were likewise noted in men. Three different
surveys of cannabis users showed that over 70% of males claimed an increase in sexual pleasure.

Reproduction and Cannabinoids: Ups and Downs, Ins and Outs

Similarly, most men noted an increase in the quality of orgasm in two of these surveys. Over a
quarter of males in these surveys stated that the cannabis enabled them to have sexual intercourse
for longer (Halikas et al. 1982; Kolodny et al. 1979; Tart 1970). These positive attributes were
found to be dose dependent: one joint smoked was concluded to ameliorate sexual desire, whereas
two or more joints smoked potentially dampened sexual motivation (Abel 1981; Koff 1974).
Chronic cannabis use has also been shown to have detrimental effects on sexual functioning.
Vallejo-Medina and Sierra found in males that consumed on average 2.7 g/day (roughly two to
three joints) and had been in withdrawal for at least 2 weeks had significantly poorer sexual functioning than a nondrug use group in four areas of sexual functioning: pleasure, desire, arousal,
and orgasm (Vallejo-Medina and Sierra 2013a, 2013b). Here, again one could hypothesize that
increases in perceptions of sexual pleasure with chronic cannabis use may be a function of the
suppression of withdrawal symptoms.
The complexity of human sexual response that combines biological, psychological,
­environmental/cultural, and interpersonal factors makes it difficult to understand what is
causing the positive aphrodisiac effects reported in these studies (i.e., mechanism of action).
One hypothesis states that the smoking of marijuana may slow temporal perception, which
could in turn increase concentration and therefore enhance focus on the sexual act itself while
also changing the perception of the length of the sexual act (Gorzalka et al. 2010; Melges 1971;
Shamloul and Bella 2011). This hypothesis was taken further through the suggestion that this
proposed increase in focus would develop into a heightened sensory focus that would cause an
erotic experience to occur not just in specific erogenous zones, but throughout the entire body,
in a manner that would boost sexual pleasure (Gorzalka et al. 2010). Another hypothesis is
that the perceived positive effects of cannabis on sexual function are due purely to the placebo
effect. Thus, since cannabis has a reputation for being an aphrodisiac, users’ sexual experiences
may be influenced by their sexual expectations of the substance (Crenshaw and Goldberg
1996; Rosen 1991). Therefore, the relationship between cannabis and sexual outcomes, such
as sexual motivation, orgasm intensity, and pleasure indices may be a coincidental change in
perception and not a change in physiological functions of the genitals. It is possible that sexual
function may be enhanced indirectly through cannabis’ anxiolytic effects. A person under the
influence of cannabis may be more relaxed; which in turn could enhance sexual functioning
by reducing the pressures of performance anxiety, a trait unique to humans. This brings us
back to the biopsychosocial aspect of how cannabinoids affect all facets of reproduction and
where to begin if we want to get a clearer understanding of their relationships.

13.3 Biological basis for cannabinoid activity in reproduction
Additional chapters in this book discuss the myriad of endogenous cannabinoid receptors both
established and putative, biosynthetic and metabolic enzymes, as well as endogenous and exogenous ligands that interact with each of these; therefore, we will not revisit this information. Within
the realm of the biological basis of reproduction the cannabinoid (CB) system has been linked to
regulation of the following systems: (1) HPG axis, (2) sperm and ova mobility, (3) implantation,
(4) reproductive tract physiology, and (5) sexual/mating behavior (Bradshaw and Allard 2011;
Bradshaw et al. 2006; Maccarrone et al. 2000, 2004; Sun and Dey 2012; Wang et al. 2004). Here, we
will attempt to focus on the biological bases for effects of phytocannabinoids on reproduction. For
a more detailed review of the endogenous cannabinoid system’s role in sexual motivation, please
refer to Leishman et al. (2013).

247

248

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

13.3.1 Cannabinoids and the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis

First coined by Phoenix and colleagues in 1959, the “organizational/activational” hypothesis
asserts that there are two key time points in sexual differentiation in the brain (Phoenix et al.
1959). The first is the critical period of early development, which is primarily organizational,
when exposure to steroid hormones causes sexual differentiation of neural circuitry and sex-­
specific reproductive tract physiology. The second begins in adolescence and is labeled the “activational” phase, when gonadal steroids bind to their respective receptors in the previously organized
neuronal circuits and reproductive tissues driving divergence in reproductive neurophysiology.
Sex steroid hormones alone do not organize these circuits; rather, it is the cellular cascades and
signaling pathways they initiate that organize the brain (McCarthy 2010). CBs have multiple roles
in driving these cascades and shaping this organization (Krebs-Kraft et al. 2010; Leishman et al.
2013). Three main lines of evidence suggest that the CB and gonadal hormone signaling systems
interact. Firstly, endogenous CBs and their receptors are present throughout the HPG axis and
changes to the CB system cause changes in the HPG axis. Second, changes in HPG axis can affect
the expression of multiple components of the CB system. Finally, the CB system mediates mating behaviors, which are also mediated by gonadal hormones (Gorzalka and Dang 2012). As an
example, chronic use of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) has been implicated in negative
reproductive outcomes, including the inhibition of ovulation in women (Brown and Dobs 2002)
and lower serum luteinizing hormone (LH) and testosterone (T) in men (Lopez 2010). How this
occurs at the molecular level is perhaps more telling in terms of long-range implications of CB
influence on reproductive neurophysiology and behavior.
CB regulation of gonadal (sex steroid) hormones is primarily through the regulation of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) release. GnRH is the central peptide that regulates
pituitary levels of LH and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), which are the stimulating hormones for gonads in both sexes that drive production of sex steroids. Sex steroids, in turn,
regulate and are regulated by GnRH neurons in the brain, which are necessary for both the
development and control of reproduction and sexual behaviors (Bakker and Brock 2010).
GnRH-producing neurons are under regulation by gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic
and glutamatergic neuronal and astrocytic control. These neurons and astrocytes express
hormone as well as CB receptors. Blocking CB signaling disrupts GABAergic postsynaptic
currents that alter GnRH-dependent depolarization (Glanowska and Moenter 2011). Likewise,
CBs can reduce basal GABAergic transmission to GnRH neurons via a metabotropic glutamate
receptor-dependent mechanism, by activating presynaptic CB 1 receptors to inhibit GABA
release, and/or by altering glial transmission (Farkas et al. 2010).
A growing body of data points to the involvement of the CB system within the organizational
effects of puberty and adolescence, including how CBs play a role in the onset of puberty. This
involvement may depend at least in part on the ability of CBs to inhibit peripubertal GnRH
neurons. Lopez hypothesizes that estradiol (E2) release from the ovaries at the time of puberty
helps remove the CB “brake” on reproductive functioning (Lopez 2010). The overall relationship
between E2 and CBs can be described as “bidirectional.” In one direction, CB activity downregulates HPG axis activity, leading to reduced E2 levels. In contrast, by decreasing fatty acid amide
hydrolase (FAAH) activity and modulating CB1 expression, E2 upregulates anandamide (AEA)
production (Gorzalka and Dang 2012).
Neuronal circuitry of sexual motivation likely involves the CB system in multiple regions of the
brain (Gorzalka et al. 2010: Shamloul and Bella 2011). In rodents, striatal and cerebral CB1 receptor stimulation may produce reduced motor activity and increased coordination (Egashira et al.

Reproduction and Cannabinoids: Ups and Downs, Ins and Outs

2002). CB1 receptors may be able to regulate stress responses and emotional behavior due to their
presence in the corticolimbic structures (mainly prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and hippocampus),
thereby indirectly affecting sexual behavior (McLaughlin et al. 2007). Activation of CB1 receptors
within the dorsal raphe (cell bodies for serotonergic input to forebrain) and the ventral tegmental
area (VTA) (cell bodies for dopaminergic input to forebrain) modulate the synaptic release of
both serotonin and dopamine (DA), each of which is intricately involved in the regulation of genital reflexes, sexual motivation, and inhibition (Giraldi et al. 2004; Matyas et al. 2008). Finally, CB1
receptors within the hypothalamus regulate the release of several peptides important for sexual
activity, physiology, and reproductive neuroendocrinology, such as oxytocin (Sabatier and Leng
2006) and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (Gammon et al. 2005).
Growing evidence suggests that Δ9-THC affects males and females differently. This is not to
say that there is not a large variation in response within the sexes, but there have been enough
intersex differences shown to suggest gonadal steroid modulation of exogenous cannabinoid
effects, including reward. After showing that CB1 receptor agonists induce stronger analgesic
and motor suppressing effects in female rats than in male rats, Craft and colleagues investigated
whether activational effects of gonadal hormones were responsible for these differences. In males,
T attenuated the motor effects of Δ9-THC. In females, E2 was linked to increased antinociception.
Ovariectomized (OVX) females showed less analgesia in response to Δ9-THC than OVX females
given E2. In addition, intact estrous females showed more antinociception than diestrous females
(Craft and Leitl 2008). Fattore and colleagues determined that female rats found the CB1 agonist
WIN55,212-2 (WIN) more rewarding than male rats. Compared to male rats and OVX females,
female rats showed faster acquisition of WIN self-administration and higher overall drug intake.
However, gonad-intact female rats showed faster extinction from WIN self-administration. One
explanation is that there is a higher hedonistic value on cannabinoids for females (Fattore et al.
2007). On the other hand, E2 may attenuate the disruptive effects of Δ9-THC on learning, leaving
female rats less affected by the drug’s negative side effects (Daniel et al. 2002). It is possible that
the greater response to Δ9-THC seen in female rats is due to E2 modulation of DA signaling in
the VTA and nucleus accumbens (NAc). However, the precise interactions between CBs and E2
in these regions are not well understood (Lopez 2010). It may be, however, that hormones are not
the only answer and that the sex differences in development (both organizational and activational
effects) also cause some effects of cannabis to be different in men and women.

13.4 Cannabinoids and male reproduction and sexuality:

the ups and downs
In male rodents, the effect of cannabis on sexual behavior was examined after intraperitoneal
injections of Δ9-THC followed by exposure of the male to a receptive female. Data showed that at
doses as low as 0.5 mg/kg inhibited sexual behavior by reducing the number of mounts and the
ejaculation frequency (Gorzalka et al. 2010; Merari et al. 1973). Higher doses increased latency
before the first mount, latency to ejaculate, and latency to mount following ejaculation. Doses
as high as 10 mg/kg of Δ9-THC impair sexual motivation across all species exhibiting this effect
(mice, humans); the underlying mechanism has yet to be determined, one possibility being that
this impairment arises from motor deficits resulting from catalepsy. This dose dependence was
also tested with intraperitoneal injections of AEA. At lower doses ejaculation frequency was
increased slightly, whereas with higher doses mount, intromission, and ejaculation latencies were
all increased (Martinez-Gonzalez et al. 2004). This suggests the CB system may have an inhibitory function as well as a facilitatory function in regulating sexual behavior (Gorzalka et al. 2010).

249

250

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

To test this duality, the CB1 receptor agonist HU-210 was examined for effects on copulation rates.
HU-210 reduced male rat copulation in a dose-dependent manner even at doses that did not
affect motor function, whereas the CB1 receptor antagonist/inverse agonist AM251 led to dosedependent facilitation of ejaculation in male rats (Ferrari et al. 2000; Gorzalka et al. 2008). Recent
evidence has shown that AM251 is not specific to CB1 in that it also blocks the NAGly responsive
receptor, GPR18, a finding that may explain some of this duality (McHugh et al. 2012).
Cannabis as an aphrodisiac may seem at the least less linked to “medical treatments” than many
conditions. However, pathophysiological conditions associated with sex may have a closer link
to justified medicinal use. Sexual headaches have a close resemblance to migraines as they both
respond to a common mechanism of vascular hyperactivity (Álvaro et al. 2002). Men who develop
these headaches are more prone to develop ischemic symptoms and stroke. Since cannabis use
can induce swings in blood pressure, it is thought that in one case study, the alterations of blood
pressure from cannabis use along with the alterations in blood pressure of orgasm caused a man
to have a stroke (Álvaro et al. 2002). Interestingly, this link with changes in vascular tone may be
related to the relationship of cannabis use and impotence. Cohen found that 19% of daily cannabis
users had a prevalence of erectile dysfunction when compared to 8% in the control group (Cohen
1982). One study highlighted a correlation between cannabis use in young males (mean age
30) and erectile dysfunction exhibited by endothelial dysfunction and vascular damage (Aversa
et al. 2008). It is thought that chronic cannabis smoking may alter both the endothelial dependent
and independent vasodilatatory pathways (Aversa et al. 2008). In a related case study of two male
subjects with erectile dysfunction, the discontinuing of use of the drug allowed one male to regain
erectile functioning (Gorzalka et al. 2010).
Alternatively, animal and in vitro studies provide evidence to connect the CB system with the
inhibition of erectile dysfunction. Oxytocin-producing neurons located in the paraventricular
nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus are responsible for regulating male copulatory behavior
including male erection. These neurons contain CB1 receptors whose blockade has been found to
increase penile erection. This is thought to be through the decrease in the release of the neurotransmitter GABA and an increase in glutamate, which signals the production of nitric oxide
(NO) via NO synthase (NOS) in the oxytocinergic neurons. Oxytocin release, which is responsible for penile erections, is triggered by the increase in NO. Administering SR141716A, a CB1
antagonist, into the PVN of male rats induced erections (Shamloul and Bella 2011).
To induce and maintain a penile erection, the cavernous smooth muscle in the corpus cavernosum must relax. Both CB1 and CB2 receptors are expressed on NOS-containing nerves in the
corpus cavernosum of rhesus monkeys and humans (Gratzke et al. 2010). AEA administration
antagonized the relaxation of the corpus cavernosum in the rhesus monkeys (Gratzke et al. 2010).
CB1 has also been found in the corpus cavernosum of rats and rabbits. The effect of AEA in rats
is different from that of the rhesus monkey, as it increases relaxation in this species. This highlights that although CB signaling may have a peripheral role in sexual behavior, it may be species
dependent (Shamloul and Bella 2011).
Cannabis use in males has also been associated with adverse effects on male fertility at both
a hormonal and spermatogenesis level (Kumar et al. 2009). In males, it is believed that Δ9-THC
blocks release of GnRH, ultimately decreasing testosterone production (Kumar et al. 2009). THC
consumption also has a negative effect on sperm mobility. It is believed that marijuana smoke
causes a cannabinoid dependent increase in reactive oxidative species (ROS). An imbalance
between the amount of ROS and antioxidants in a cell can lead to oxidative stress. Oxidative stress,
the major cause of DNA damage in the male germ line, is associated with poor sperm quality, low
fertilization rates, impaired preimplantation development, increased abortion rates, and elevated

Reproduction and Cannabinoids: Ups and Downs, Ins and Outs

incidence of disease in offspring. It also alters another essential sperm function, that of the acrosome reaction, the reaction occurring when the sperm fuses to the plasma membrane of the egg,
impairing the acrosome reactions of the poorer sperm at recreational concentrations of THC.
Finally, the expression/activity of CB1 controls the physiological alterations of DNA packaging
during spermatogenesis and epididymal transit. Therefore, smoking cannabis may impair fertility
outcomes as well (Pasqualotto and Pasqualotto 2012).

13.5 Cannabinoids and female reproduction and sexuality:

the ins and outs
One of the first documented uses of cannabis in relation to the female reproductive system was
by the Egyptian civilization in 2350 bc. An ancient passage reads, “Another (to cool the uterus
and eliminate its heat): shemshemet (cannabis); ground in honey; introduced into her vagina . . .
causing a contraction” (Russo 2007). These writings generated the conclusion that cannabis was
used as an obstetric aid. An archeological dig of a tomb in Israel during the early 1990s revealed
a skeleton of a young woman and the skeleton of her partially born fetus (still within her pelvis).
Traces of Δ8-THC, a trace component of cannabis, was found in her abdominal area denoting
that cannabis had been used during the attempted childbirth (Zias et al. 1993). It has since been
determined that cannabis was also used in the treatment of: menstrual irregularity, menorrhagia,
dysmenorrhea, threatened abortion, hyperemesis gravidarum, childbirth, postpartum hemorrhage, toxemic seizures, dysuria, urinary frequency, urinary retention, gonorrhea, menopausal
symptoms, decreased libido, and as a possible abortifacient (Russo 2002).
The dual effect of cannabis on sexual behavior in female rats also appears to be dose dependent, with high doses impairing lordosis but having a facilitatory effect at low doses (Gorzalka
et al. 2010). In a study performed on female hamsters, the administration of Δ9-THC stimulated
lordosis and ultrasound production, a form of communication used to assess sexual proceptivity (Turley and Floody 1981). Lordosis, or in general sexual receptivity, was also stimulated by
the addition of low doses of THC in E2-treated female rats (Mani et al. 2001b). This effect was
diminished when SR141716A was administered (Mani et al. 2001b). An adrenalectomy was also
done on these females to test the hypothesis that Δ9-THC was acting like an ovarian steroid or
by enhancing adrenal secretions that would facilitate lordosis. Even with the adrenals removed
the facilitory effect remained, suggesting that Δ9-THC was probably acting on the central nervous system (Gordon et al. 1978). Additionally, they showed that Δ9-THC did not induce sexual
receptivity when ovarian hormones were removed and it did not function like progesterone in
E2-treated rats (Gordon et al. 1978). Antagonizing the CB1 receptor has also been seen to block
DA- and progesterone-induced sexual facilitation, whereas blocking the progesterone and DA
receptors demonstrated the sexually enhancing effect of THC. Sexual behavior in the female rat
therefore depends on the linking of CB1 with dopaminergic and progesterone pathways, all three
of which are found within different regions of the hypothalamus involved in sexual behavior
regulation (Gorzalka et al. 2010; Mani et al. 2001a). In two studies, the potent agonists CP55,940
and HU-210, were administered and were found to lessen instead of enhance female receptivity and motivation. CP55,940 produced its effects in a dose-dependent manner, a higher dose
(~40 micrograms/kg) inhibiting sexual motivation to a greater extent than a lower dose (~20
micrograms/kg). However, a dosage that high also attenuates a female’s social motivation, and
so may not be targeting sexual behavior specifically (Gorzalka et al. 2010; Lopez et al. 2009).
Another study found that AM251 significantly increased, rather than decreased, sexual motivation, receptivity, and proceptivity in the female rat (Lopez et al. 2009). Interestingly, differences

251

252

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

in methodology could be the reason for discrepancies among these studies in that the types of
mating strategies used in these studies were varied. Female rats will only show conditioned placed
preference (CPP) and upregulation of DA for mating when provided a paced-mating opportunity,
whereas, no CPP or DA upregulation occurs during standard mating (Martinez and Paredes
2001). Therefore, when the mating situations did not drive changes in DA circuits, the effects of
CBs may not have been as strong.
Unsurprisingly, there is very little focus on the neurophysiology of human female sexual
response that would be analogous to the work in men in the context of cannabinoids. There are
no published data on cannabinoids and the clitoris that could be found through any literature
search engines at our disposal, whereas, there are data on cannabinoids and penis function
highlighted previously in this chapter. Somewhat predictably, of the five reports listed when the
search was “cannabinoids and the vagina,” three of them are aimed at sperm motility studies and
the other two were animal studies on disease transmission rates. Perhaps this is simply a reflection of the overwhelming lack of research on the subject of female sexual arousal as a whole and
not on cannabinoid research specifically. There is, however, a rapidly growing literature on the
aspects of the female reproductive tract that are specifically geared toward pregnancy. Given the
logical constraints of human experimentation during pregnancy, all of the experimental data are
gathered in animal models, though observational data do exist for humans. How translational
the animal findings are, like most basic science using animal models, remains to be determined.
Many of these findings do provide strong evidence for important CB roles in cyclic changes in
the reproductive tract, fertilization, implantation, and parturition; therefore, each will be summarized here.
Much of the female reproductive tract physiology produces each of the major constituents of
the CB system: CB1, CB2, AEA, 2-arachidonoyl glycerol, and FAAH have been discovered in the
uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes of both humans and rats (Bradshaw and Allard 2011; Habayeb
et al. 2002; Sun and Dey 2012; Taylor et al. 2010b). Specifically in humans, CB1 was localized in
the ovary, while CB1 and CB2 were localized in oocytes, and the myometrium and endometrium
of the uterus (Taylor et al. 2010b). Immunohistochemistry was used to localize the CB1 protein,
which was found in the smooth muscle of the wall, endothelial vessels, and luminal epithelium of
the fallopian tube (Horne et al. 2008). Within the epithelial glands and stroma, CB2 was observed
most prominently in the late proliferation phase whereas CB1 was more intense in the glands than
the stroma (not tested across cycle) (Taylor et al. 2010a, 2010c). The localization of both CB1 and
CB2 expression also changed throughout the different stages of oocyte maturation (Maccarrone
2009). CB1 expression in the pregnant uterus was seen by the detection of CB1 mRNA in woman
with ectopic pregnancies (Horne et al. 2008). This expression of CB1 mRNA was also seen in the
pregnant and ovariectomized mouse uterus (Das et al. 1995).
In species with estrous cycles, such as rodents, females are only sexually active during estrus,
referred to as behavioral estrus, which coincides with the time of ovulation. In contrast, many
primate species with menstrual cycles are sexually active at any time in their cycle, though some
data suggest a stronger drive for mating around the time of ovulation in these species as well. The
onset of ovulation is dependent on the release of LH via HPG axis regulation. Exogenous cannabinoids such as Δ9-THC have been shown to suppress plasma FSH and the preovulatory surge
of LH, which inhibits ovulation (Taylor et al. 2007). AEA has a similar effect, decreasing levels of
serum prolactin and LH (Wenger et al. 1999). This seems contradictory to the finding that the
success of pregnancy (a result of mating) correlates with higher levels of AEA in plasma during
the time of ovulation (Maccarrone 2009). However, it is supported by an observation by Lazzarin
et al. (2004) that both a significant increase in AEA and a significant decrease in FAAH activity

Reproduction and Cannabinoids: Ups and Downs, Ins and Outs

occurred during ovulation. The variation in FAAH activity during the ovulation/hormonal cycle
also seems to be influenced by the concentration of progesterone, illustrating another example of
signaling synergy between sex hormones and the CB system (Lazzarin et al. 2004).
Successful mating not only involves access and a drive to copulate, timed events for ovulation, and availability of viable mates; it also relies heavily on the next initiation event in the
cascade, which is implantation of a developed blastocyst. For implantation to occur and the blastocyst to attach to the luminal epithelium of the uterus in a mammalian species, the uterus must
first enter a receptive phase and the blastocyst must be implantation competent (Maccarrone
2009). Blastocysts actually release a FAAH activator, which helps to dispose of anandamide at the
implantation site (Karasu et al. 2011). Therefore, an upregulation in AEA is correlated with uterine refractoriness, inversely related to uterine receptivity (Park et al. 2004). Interestingly, levels of
AEA are lowest at the actual site of implantation and highest at the interimplantation sites (Park
et al. 2004). AEA is hypothesized to act on a CB1-mediated pathway influencing implantation.
This notion was solidified by the addition of CP55,940, a synthetic cannabinoid, during the
preimplantation phase, as this was found successfully to prevent implantation (Park et al. 2004).
Finally, the human fallopian tube has a varied expression of CB1 mRNA in the endometrium of
women with ectopic pregnancy. It has been hypothesized that malfunctioned endocannabinoid
signaling is responsible for the incorrect positioning of implantation (Helliwell et al. 2004).
13.5.1 Cannabis use during pregnancy: short-term

and long-term consequences

In a descriptive study of almost 25,000 women referred to a hospital in Brisbane, Australia for
antenatal care, 2.6% of women surveyed used cannabis during pregnancy (Hayatbakhsh et al.
2012). This is similar to estimates of the prevalence of cannabis use during pregnancy in the US,
which is around 2.9% (Huizink and Mulder 2006). However, 9.5% of the women surveyed in the
Australian study reported regular cannabis use before becoming pregnant, showing that even
regular cannabis users often abstain during pregnancy. Even after controlling for use of alcohol,
tobacco, and other drugs, cannabis use in pregnancy was associated with low birth weight, preterm labor, babies who were small for gestational age, and admission to the neonatal intensive care
unit (Hayatbakhsh et al. 2012).
Although cannabis use during pregnancy has been associated with preterm delivery and low
birth weight (Hayatbakhsh et al. 2012), the demographic characteristics of women who use cannabis during pregnancy are often different from those of women who do not use drugs during
pregnancy. Van Gelder and colleagues gathered structured interviews regarding illicit drug use
during pregnancy from 5871 women in the US. Women who reported use of cannabis, cocaine,
or stimulants during pregnancy were more likely to be young, be unemployed, have a low education level, and to have a low income level than women who abstained from illicit drug use during
pregnancy. Although women who used illicit drugs during pregnancy were more likely to be
underweight, the cannabis-using women were actually more likely to have excessive weight gain
during pregnancy. Illicit drug use during pregnancy was also associated with low folic acid intake.
Interestingly, the women who reported cannabis use were less likely to have already had children
but were more likely to have had an abortion in the past. Illicit drug use during pregnancy was
also significantly associated with alcohol and tobacco use during pregnancy (van Gelder et al.
2010). Hayatbakhsh’s study of Australian women also reported similar demographic differences:
cannabis-using women were more likely to be younger and less educated than women who did not
use cannabis during pregnancy (Hayatbakhsh et al. 2012). Despite differences in demographics

253

254

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

between the cannabis using and noncannabis using mothers, van Gelder and colleagues reported
no significant association between cannabis use and mean birth weight or gestational age (van
Gelder et al. 2010).
The frequency of cannabis use during pregnancy may have an effect on birth outcomes. For
example, Fergusson’s group surveyed 12,000 British pregnant women between 18 and 20 weeks of
gestation about frequency of drug use before and during pregnancy (Fergusson et al. 2002). The
surveys were then correlated with birth outcomes that included: late fetal and perinatal death,
admission to the infant intensive care unit, birth weight, birth length, and head circumference.
Use of cannabis during pregnancy was associated with lower maternal income and age, and was
also associated with the use of alcohol, tobacco, caffeine, and other hard drugs during pregnancy.
With cannabis use during pregnancy as the only factor, there was no link between cannabis use
and fetal death or infant intensive care. However, the babies born to cannabis using mothers were
more likely to be smaller, with a lower birth weight, length, and head circumference. After adjusting for use of other drugs, the association between cannabis use and small infants was no longer
significant, except for women who used cannabis at least once per week before and throughout
pregnancy (Fergusson et al. 2002). In a meta-analysis of studies that examined the effect of marijuana use during pregnancy on birth weight controlling for cigarette smoking, English and colleagues found that there was substantial heterogeneity among studies (English et al. 1997). They
found that a frequency of marijuana use of once per week or less was actually correlated with an
increase in mean birth weight. It was not until women frequently consumed marijuana multiple
times a week during pregnancy that there was a reduction in birth weight, and most women who
use cannabis during pregnancy do not smoke nearly that much. Therefore, the authors concluded
that cannabis is unlikely to contribute to low birth weight when used in the amount typically
taken by pregnant women (English et al. 1997).
Longitudinal studies tracking the development of children who were prenatally exposed to
marijuana have shown that there are potentially lasting effects of marijuana use during pregnancy.
Several studies have been based on the Maternal Health Practices and Child Development Study
(MHPCD), which followed a “high-risk” cohort of American women with low socioeconomic
status (Huizink and Mulder 2006). In this cohort, 19% of subjects reported using marijuana during pregnancy and 5% smoked one or more joints every day during their pregnancy (Goldschmidt
et al. 2000). The first follow-up study examined babies born to the women in the MHPCD at age 3
years. The children’s intelligence levels were measured with the Stanford–Binet intelligence scale,
which is a composite of verbal reasoning, visual reasoning, quantitative reasoning, and short-term
memory. Overall, maternal marijuana use during pregnancy had no effect on the Stanford–Binet
scores. However, there was a trending effect of marijuana use during the second trimester of
pregnancy on the short-term memory subscale of the testing. Interestingly, for the white children in the study, daycare attendance moderated effects of prenatal marijuana exposure to offset
negative consequences, but no such moderation was seen in African American children (Day
et al. 1994). Using the same subjects as the Day group, Leech and colleagues found that 6-year-old
children exposed to cannabis in the second trimester were more impulsive in a continuous performance task (Leech et al. 1999). Surveys filled out by the children’s teachers indicated that the
children prenatally exposed to marijuana exhibited more delinquent behavior (Leech et al. 1999).
At age 10, these same children were assessed for hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention by
self-reported surveys filled out by their mothers and for the presence of externalizing psychopathology by another survey filled out by the mothers. Prenatal marijuana exposure during the first
and third trimesters significantly predicted increased hyperactivity, inattention, and impulsivity
symptoms. Additionally, the children exposed to marijuana were more likely to score higher on

Reproduction and Cannabinoids: Ups and Downs, Ins and Outs

ratings of delinquency and externalizing disorders, although this was a result of marijuanainduced inattentive symptoms (Goldschmidt et al. 2000).
A similar longitudinal study is the Ottawa Prenatal Prospective Study (OPPS), which began in
1978 and focused on a group of mostly white, middle-class women. At 1 year of age, children born
to mothers who used cannabis prenatally were not significantly different than nonexposed infants
in measurements of motor and mental development. At age 2, the prenatally exposed children
scored lower on a test of language comprehension, but this was not significant after controlling for the children’s home environments. Furthermore, at age 3 there was no effect of prenatal
marijuana exposure on language expression and comprehension or on cognition. It was not until
age 4 that significant effects of prenatal marijuana exposure became more profound; however,
the association between prenatal exposure and lower memory and verbal scores was only significant for children of mothers who smoked marijuana heavily (five or more joints per week)
during pregnancy. When cognitive tests were performed on the same children at ages 9–12, there
was no link between prenatal marijuana exposure and full-scale IQ, however exposed children
performed more poorly on tests of visual–spatial organization and impulse control. Although
exposed children did score higher in reports of delinquent behavior filled out by their mothers,
the correlation was not significant once extraneous variables were controlled for (Fried and Smith
2001). Interestingly, neither of the longitudinal studies found an effect of maternal marijuana use
on miscarriage rates, duration of gestation, or frequency of labor complications. Contrary to other
studies, prenatal marijuana use was actually linked with higher birth weight in both the MHPCD
and OPPS cohorts (Fried and Smith 2001).
Many of the published studies on cannabis use during pregnancy rely on self-report surveys.
Given that discovery of illicit drug use during pregnancy can have negative legal and social consequences for pregnant women, there may be reluctance to report use (Hayatbakhsh et al. 2012).
In a study of Dutch women, El Marroun’s group found substantial agreement between self-reports
of cannabis use during pregnancy and positive urinalysis for cannabis exposure (El Marroun
et al. 2011). However, although 92 women (2.3%) reported using cannabis in pregnancy, only
33 of them had positive urine screens. 7.6% of women who used cannabis before pregnancy but
quit during pregnancy had a positive urine screen, which could perhaps be a result of the long
half-life of the THC metabolite, 11-nor-Δ9-THC-9-COOH. Only 0.4% of women who had never
used cannabis had a positive urine screen, suggesting that false positives for cannabis use during
pregnancy are rare (El Marroun et al. 2011).
Although prenatal exposure to marijuana has been correlated with future vulnerability to addiction (Huizink and Mulder 2006), the potential biochemical mechanisms that increase the risk of
addiction have not been well characterized in humans. Aiming to identify a mechanism, DiNieri’s
group examined human fetal brain tissue from fetuses terminated between 18 and 22 weeks of
gestation (DiNieri et al. 2011). Some of the fetal brains had been exposed to THC, as determined
by maternal self-report and urinalysis, and these were compared to brains that had not been
exposed to cannabis. Maternal alcohol and tobacco use was assessed by self-report, and there
was no significant difference in maternal alcohol or tobacco use between groups. The authors
hypothesized that differences would be found in the dopaminergic system of cannabis-exposed
brains because this circuit is involved in addiction. Using in situ hybridization histochemistry,
DiNieri’s group found decreased DA D2 receptor mRNA levels in the NAc of fetuses exposed to
THC, but did not find any significant differences in DA D1 receptor mRNA. In contrast, brains
from fetuses exposed to alcohol but not cannabis had lower expression of both DA receptors in
the dorsal striatum. Interestingly, the alcohol exposed fetuses had normal levels of D2 expression
in the NAc (DiNieri et al. 2011).

255

256

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

In an animal model of prenatal THC exposure, male rats born to mothers who were injected
with 0.15 mg/kg THC daily from gestation day five (GD5) to postnatal day two (PND2) had
lower D2 receptor mRNA levels and fewer DA D2 receptor binding sites in the NAc than control
rats. These changes persisted into adulthood. Interestingly, there were also behavioral effects of
prenatal THC exposure: rats prenatally exposed to THC exhibited a higher sensitivity to heroin
self-administration and showed higher conditioned place preference for morphine compared to
vehicle-exposed rats (DiNieri et al. 2011).
Cannabis use during human pregnancy has been correlated with poor birth outcomes and may
have some lasting effects on cognition. However, all of the studies are epidemiological in nature
and do not allow for any conclusions to be made regarding causality. Given the differences in
income and education levels between mothers who use cannabis in pregnancy and mothers who
abstain from drugs in pregnancy, it is not surprising that there could also be differences in their
offspring. Although it is not certain that smoking cannabis when pregnant harms the fetus, it
is probably unwise to subject a developing nervous system to exogenous cannabinoids because
it could potentially disrupt the endogenous cannabinoid system, a system that ensures proper
neural development.

13.6 Conclusions
“It’s hugely difficult to forecast the business cycle. Understanding an organism as complex as the
economy is very hard”: Jan Hatzius, Chief economist for Goldman Sachs as quoted in Nate Silver’s
book, The Signal and the Noise: Why So Many Predictions Fail-but Some Don’t (Silver 2012). To
borrow from this quotation of Jan Hatzius: “understanding an organism as complex as the human
is very hard.” Humans do not have sex simply for procreation, on this point we can (mostly) agree.
Likewise, humans do not use cannabis simply for recreation, also on this point we can (mostly)
agree. That these recreational, procreative, and social outlets for human behavior have the opportunity to be positively and negatively synergistic is both fascinating and predictable. Much of our
evolutionary processes are geared toward maintaining balance. Pharmacology has long been one
of our answers to restoring balance. We need a deeper understanding of the mechanisms of action
by which cannabinoids induce changes in neuroendocrine circuits that drive reproductive and
sexual phenotypes as well as how cannabis use affects functional physiology of the reproductive
tract. Animal studies have greatly advanced our knowledge; however, there is a great need for
human studies. Those working in the cannabinoid field are acutely aware of the difficulties of
conducting cannabis experiments with humans. We applaud those brave few who also combine
studies in sexuality. Thank you for your many efforts.

References
Abel, E.L. (1981). Marihuana and sex: a critical survey. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 8, 1–22.
Álvaro, L.C., Iriondo, I., and Villaverde, F.J. (2002). Sexual headache and stroke in a heavy cannabis
smoker. Headache: The Journal of Head and Face Pain, 42, 224–226.
Aversa, A., Rossi, F., Francomano, D., et al. (2008). Early endothelial dysfunction as a marker of vasculogenic erectile dysfunction in young habitual cannabis users. International Journal of Impotence Research,
20, 566–573.
Bakker, J. and Brock, O. (2010). Early oestrogens in shaping reproductive networks: evidence for a potential organisational role of oestradiol in female brain development. Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 22,
728–735.
Bradshaw, H. and Allard, C. (2011). Endogenous cannabinoid production in the rat female reproductive
tract is regulated by changes in the hormonal milieu. Pharmaceuticals, 4, 933–949.

Reproduction and Cannabinoids: Ups and Downs, Ins and Outs

Bradshaw, H.B., Rimmerman, N., Krey, J.F., and Walker, J.M. (2006). Sex and hormonal cycle differences
in rat brain levels of pain-related cannabimimetic lipid mediators. American Journal of Physiology –
Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology, 291, R349–358.
Brown, T.T. and Dobs, A.S. (2002). Endocrine effects of marijuana. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 42,
90S–96S.
Cohen, S. (1982). Cannabis and sex: multifaceted paradoxes. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 14, 55–58.
Craft, R.M. and Leitl, M.D. (2008). Gonadal hormone modulation of the behavioral effects of Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol in male and female rats. European Journal of Pharmacology, 578, 37–42.
Crenshaw, T.L. and Goldberg, J.P. (1996). Marijuana and other illegal drugs. In: Sexual Pharmacology:
Drugs That Affect Sexual Functioning. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, pp. 189–193.
Daniel, J.M., Winsauer, P.J., Brauner, I.N., and Moerschbaecher, J.M. (2002). Estrogen improves response
accuracy and attenuates the disruptive effects of delta9-THC in ovariectomized rats responding under a
multiple schedule of repeated acquisition and performance. Behavioral Neuroscience, 116, 989–998.
Das, S.K., Paria, B.C., Chakraborty, I., and Dey, S.K. (1995). Cannabinoid ligand-receptor signaling in the
mouse uterus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 92, 4332–4336.
Day, N.L., Richardson, G.A., Goldschmidt, L. et al. (1994). Effect of prenatal marijuana exposure on the
cognitive development of offspring at age three. Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 16, 169–175.
DiNieri, J.A., Wang, X., Szutorisz, H., et al. (2011). Maternal cannabis use alters ventral striatal dopamine
D2 gene regulation in the offspring. Biological Psychiatry, 70, 763–769.
Dirks, H., Esser, S., Borgmann, R., et al. (2012). Substance use and sexual risk behaviour among HIVpositive men who have sex with men in specialized out-patient clinics. HIV Medicine, 13, 533–540.
Egashira, N., Mishima, K., Iwasaki, K., and Fujiwara, M. (2002). Intracerebral microinjections of Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol: search for the impairment of spatial memory in the eight-arm radial maze in rats.
Brain Research, 952, 239–245.
El Marroun, H., Tiemeier, H., Jaddoe, V.W., et al. (2011). Agreement between maternal cannabis use during pregnancy according to self-report and urinalysis in a population-based cohort: the Generation R
Study. European Journal of Addiction Research, 17, 37–43.
English, D.R., Hulse, G.K., Milne, E., Holman, C.D., and Bower, C.I. (1997). Maternal cannabis use and
birth weight: a meta-analysis. Addiction, 92, 1553–1560.
Farkas, I., Kallo, I., Deli, L. et al. (2010). Retrograde endocannabinoid signaling reduces GABAergic synaptic transmission to gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. Endocrinology, 151, 5818–5829.
Fattore, L., Spano, M.S., Altea, S., Angius, F., Fadda, P., and Fratta, W. (2007). Cannabinoid selfadministration in rats: sex differences and the influence of ovarian function. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 152, 795–804.
Fergusson, D.M., Horwood, L.J., and Northstone, K. (2002). Maternal use of cannabis and pregnancy outcome. British Journal of Gynaecology, 109, 21–27.
Ferrari, F., Ottani, A., and Giuliani, D. (2000). Inhibitory effects of the cannabinoid agonist HU 210 on rat
sexual behaviour. Physiology & Behavior, 69, 547–554.
Fried, P.A. and Smith, A.M. (2001). A literature review of the consequences of prenatal marihuana
exposure. An emerging theme of a deficiency in aspects of executive function. Neurotoxicology and
Teratology, 23, 1–11.
Gammon, C.M., Freeman, G.M., Xie, W., Petersen, S.L., and Wetsel, W.C. (2005). Regulation of gonadotropinreleasing hormone secretion by cannabinoids. Endocrinology, 146, 4491–4499.
Giraldi, A., Marson, L., Nappi, R., et al. (2004). Physiology of female sexual function: animal models. The
Journal of Sexual Medicine, 1, 237–253.
Glanowska, K.M. and Moenter, S.M. (2011). Endocannabinoids and prostaglandins both contribute to
GnRH neuron-GABAergic afferent local feedback circuits. Journal of Neurophysiology, 106, 3073–3081.
Goldschmidt, L., Day, N.L., and Richardson, G.A. (2000). Effects of prenatal marijuana exposure on child
behavior problems at age 10. Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 22, 325–336.

257

258

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Gordon, J.H., Bromley, B.L., Gorski, R.A., and Zimmermann, E. (1978). Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol
enhancement of lordosis behavior in estrogen treated female rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and
Behavior, 8, 593–596.
Gorzalka, B., Morrish, A., and Hill, M. (2008). Endocannabinoid modulation of male rat sexual behavior.
Psychopharmacology, 198, 479–486.
Gorzalka, B.B. and Dang, S.S. (2012). Minireview: endocannabinoids and gonadal hormones: bidirectional
interactions in physiology and behavior. Endocrinology, 153, 1016–1024.
Gorzalka, B.B., Hill, M.N., and Chang, S.C. (2010). Male-female differences in the effects of cannabinoids
on sexual behavior and gonadal hormone function. Hormones and Behavior, 58, 91–99.
Gratzke, C., Christ, G.J., Stief, C.G., Andersson, K.-E., and Hedlund, P. (2010). Localization and function
of cannabinoid receptors in the corpus cavernosum: basis for modulation of nitric oxide synthase nerve
activity. European Urology, 57, 342–349.
Habayeb, O.M., Bell, S.C., and Konje, J.C. (2002). Endogenous cannabinoids: metabolism and their role in
reproduction. Life Sciences, 70, 1963–1977.
Halikas, J., Weller, R., and Morse, C. (1982). Effects of regular marijuana use on sexual performance.
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 14, 59–70.
Hayatbakhsh, M.R., Flenady, V.J., Gibbons, K.S., et al. (2012). Birth outcomes associated with cannabis
use before and during pregnancy. Pediatric Research, 71, 215–219.
Helliwell, R.J.A., Chamley, L.W., Blake-Palmer, K., et al. (2004). Characterization of the endocannabinoid
system in early human pregnancy. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 89, 5168–5174.
Horne, A.W., Phillips, J.A., III, Kane, N., et al. (2008). CB1 expression is attenuated in fallopian tube and
decidua of women with ectopic pregnancy. PLoS ONE, 3, e3969.
Huizink, A.C. and Mulder, E.J. (2006). Maternal smoking, drinking or cannabis use during pregnancy
and neurobehavioral and cognitive functioning in human offspring. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 30, 24–41.
Karasu, T., Marczylo, T.H., Maccarrone, M., and Konje, J.C. (2011). The role of sex steroid hormones,
cytokines and the endocannabinoid system in female fertility. Human Reproduction Update, 17,
347–361.
Koff, W.C. (1974). Marijuana and sexual activity. Journal of Sex Research, 10, 194–204.
Kolodny, R.C., Masters, W.H., and Johnson, V.E. (1979). Textbook of Sexual Medicine. Boston, MA: Little,
Brown.
Krebs-Kraft, D.L., Hill, M.N., Hillard, C.J., and McCarthy, M.M. (2010). Sex difference in cell proliferation in developing rat amygdala mediated by endocannabinoids has implications for social
behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107,
20535–20540.
Kumar, S., Kumari, A., and Murarka, S. (2009). Lifestyle factors in deteriorating male reproductive health.
Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 47, 615–624.
Lazzarin, N., Valensise, H., Bari, M., et al. (2004). Fluctuations of fatty acid amide hydrolase and anandamide levels during the human ovulatory cycle. Gynecological Endocrinology, 18, 212–218.
Leech, S.L., Richardson, G.A., Goldschmidt, L., and Day, N.L. (1999). Prenatal substance exposure: effects
on attention and impulsivity of 6-year-olds. Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 21, 109–118.
Leishman, E., Kokesh, K.J., and Bradshaw, H.B. (2013). Lipids and addiction: how sex steroids, prostaglandins, and cannabinoids interact with drugs of abuse. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
1282, 25–38.
Lopez, H.H. (2010). Cannabinoid-hormone interactions in the regulation of motivational processes.
Hormones and Behavior, 58, 100–110.
Lopez, H.H., Webb, S.A., and Nash, S. (2009). Cannabinoid receptor antagonism increases female sexual
motivation. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 92, 17–24.

Reproduction and Cannabinoids: Ups and Downs, Ins and Outs

Maccarrone, M. (2009). Endocannabinoids: friends and foes of reproduction. Progress in Lipid Research, 48,
344–354.
Maccarrone, M., Gasperi, V., Fezza, F., Finazzi-Agro, A., and Rossi, A. (2004). Differential regulation of
fatty acid amide hydrolase promoter in human immune cells and neuronal cells by leptin and progesterone. European Journal of Biochemistry, 271, 4666–4676.
Maccarrone, M., Salvati, S., Bari, M., and Finazzi, A. (2000). Anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol
inhibit fatty acid amide hydrolase by activating the lipoxygenase pathway of the arachidonate cascade.
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 278, 576–583.
Mani, S.K., Mitchell, A., and O’Malley, B.W. (2001a). Progesterone receptor and dopamine receptors are
required in Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol modulation of sexual receptivity in female rats. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 98, 1249–1254.
Mani, S.K., Mitchell, A., and O’Malley, B.W. (2001b). Progesterone receptor and dopamine receptors are
required in Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol modulation of sexual receptivity in female rats. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 98, 1249–1254.
Martinez-Gonzalez, D., Bonilla-Jaime, H., Morales-Otal, A., Henriksen, S.J., Velazquez-Moctezuma, J.,
and Prospero-Garcia, O. (2004). Oleamide and anandamide effects on food intake and sexual behavior
of rats. Neuroscience Letters, 364, 1–6.
Martinez, I. and Paredes, R.G. (2001). Only self-paced mating is rewarding in rats of both sexes. Hormones
and Behavior, 40, 510–517.
Matyas, F., Urban, G.M., Watanabe, M., et al. (2008). Identification of the sites of 2-arachidonoylglycerol
synthesis and action imply retrograde endocannabinoid signaling at both GABAergic and glutamatergic
synapses in the ventral tegmental area. Neuropharmacology, 54, 95–107.
McCarthy, M.M. (2010). How it’s made: organisational effects of hormones on the developing brain.
Journal of Neuroendocinology, 22, 736–742.
McHugh, D., Page, J., Dunn, E., and Bradshaw, H.B. (2012). Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and
N-arachidonyl glycine are full agonists at GPR18 receptors and induce migration in human endometrial
HEC-1B cells. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165, 2414–2424.
McLaughlin, R.J., Hill, M.N., Morrish, A.C., and Gorzalka, B.B. (2007). Local enhancement of cannabinoid CB1 receptor signalling in the dorsal hippocampus elicits an antidepressant-like effect. Behavioural
Pharmacology, 18, 431–438.
Melges, F.T., Tinklenberg, J.R., Hollister, L.E., and Gillespie, H.K. (1971). Marihuana and the temporal
span of awareness. Archives of General Psychiatry, 24, 564–567.
Merari, A., Barak, A., and Plaves, M. (1973). Effects of 1(2) -tetrahydrocannabinol on copulation in the
male rat. Psychopharmacologia, 28, 243–246.
Park, B., McPartland, J.M., and Glass, M. (2004). Cannabis, cannabinoids and reproduction.
Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids, 70, 189–197.
Pasqualotto, F.F. and Pasqualotto, E.B. (2012). Recreational drugs and ROS production in mammalian
spermatozoa. In: A. Agarwal, R.J. Aitken, and J.G. Alvarez (eds.). Studies on Men’s Health and Fertility.
New York: Humana Press, pp. 417–431.
Phoenix, C.H., Goy, R.W., Gerall, A.A., and Young, W.C. (1959). Organizing action of prenatally administered testosterone propionate on the tissues mediating mating behavior in the female guinea pig.
Endocrinology, 65, 369–382.
Rätsch, C. (2001). Marijuana Medicine: A World Tour of the Healing and Visionary Powers of Cannabis.
Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions/Bear.
Rosen, R.C. (1991). Alcohol and drug effects on sexual response: human experimental and clinical studies.
Annual Review of Sex Research, 2, 119–179.
Russo, E. (2002). Cannabis treatments in obstetrics and gynecology: a historical review. Journal of Cannabis
Therapeutics, 2, 5–35.

259

260

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Russo, E.B. (2007). History of cannabis and its preparations in saga, science, and sobriquet. Chemistry and
Biodiversity, 4, 1614–1648.
Sabatier, N. and Leng, G. (2006). Presynaptic actions of endocannabinoids mediate MSH-induced inhibition of oxytocin cells. American Journal of Physiology – Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative
Physiology, 290, R577–R584.
Shamloul, R. and Bella, A.J. (2011). Impact of cannabis use on male sexual health. Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 8, 971–975.
Silver, N. (2012). The Signal and the Noise: Why So Many Predictions Fail – But Some Don’t. New York:
Penguin.
Smith, A., Ferris, J.A., Simpson, J.M., Shelley, J., Pitts, M.K., and Richters, J. (2010). Cannabis use and
sexual health. The Journal of Sexual Medicine, 7, 787–793.
Sun, X. and Dey, S.K. (2012). Endocannabinoid signaling in female reproduction. American Chemical
Society Chemical Neuroscience, 3, 349–355.
Tart, C.T. (1970). Marijuana intoxication: common experiences. Nature, 226, 701–704.
Taylor, A., Abbas, M., Habiba, M., and Konje, J. (2010a). Histomorphometric evaluation of cannabinoid
receptor and anandamide modulating enzyme expression in the human endometrium through the
menstrual cycle. Histochemistry and Cell Biology, 133, 557–565.
Taylor, A.H., Abbas, M.S., Habiba, M.A., and Konje, J.C. (2010b). Histomorphometric evaluation of cannabinoid receptor and anandamide modulating enzyme expression in the human endometrium through
the menstrual cycle. Histochemistry and Cell Biology, 133, 557–565.
Taylor, A.H., Amoako, A.A., Bambang, K., et al. (2010c). Endocannabinoids and pregnancy. Clinica
Chimica Acta, 411, 921–930.
Taylor, A.H., Ang, C., Bell, S.C., and Konje, J.C. (2007). The role of the endocannabinoid system in gametogenesis, implantation and early pregnancy. Human Reproduction Update, 13, 501–513.
Turley Jr, W.A. and Floody, O.R. (1981). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol stimulates receptive and proceptive sexual behaviors in female hamsters. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 14, 745–747.
Vallejo-Medina, P. and Sierra, J.C. (2013a). Adaptation, equivalence, and validation of the Changes in
Sexual Functioning Questionnaire-Drugs (CSFQ-D) in a sample of drug-dependent males. Journal of
Sex & Marital Therapy, 368–384.
Vallejo-Medina, P. and Sierra, J.C. (2013b). Effect of drug use and influence of abstinence on sexual functioning in a Spanish male drug-dependent sample: a multisite study. The Journal of Sexual Medicine,
333–341.
van Gelder, M.M., Reefhuis, J., Caton, A.R., Werler, M.M., Druschel, C.M., and Roeleveld, N. (2010).
Characteristics of pregnant illicit drug users and associations between cannabis use and perinatal outcome in a population-based study. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 109, 243–247.
Wang, H., Guo, Y., Wang, D., et al. (2004). Aberrant cannabinoid signaling impairs oviductal transport of
embryos. Nature Medicine, 10, 1074–1080.
Wenger, T., Tóth, B.E., Juanéda, C., Leonardelli, J., and Tramu, G. (1999). The effects of cannabinoids on
the regulation of reproduction. Life Sciences, 65, 695–701.
Zias, J., Stark, H., Sellgman, J., et al. (1993). Early medical use of cannabis. Nature, 363, 215.

Chapter 14

Phytocannabinoids and the Immune
System
Guy A. Cabral, Erinn S. Raborn,
and Gabriela A. Ferreira

14.1 Phytocannabinoids
Phytocannabinoids are a class of compounds from the marijuana plant, Cannabis sativa. These
include the major nonpsychoactive components cannabidiol (CBD), cannabinol (CBN), cannabigerol (CBG), and the major psychoactive component delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).
The purification and structural analysis of THC have led to the synthesis of analogs that have
been used in structure–activity studies to characterize cannabinoid-mediated effects and define
their mechanism of action. Such studies led to the recognition that THC exhibits specificity of
action at the physiological and pharmacological levels and can act through the G inhibitory (Gi)
protein-coupled receptors, cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1R), and cannabinoid receptor type 2
(CB2R). The CB1R accounts for most, if not all, of the centrally mediated effects of cannabinoids
and is concentrated in areas of the brain that control movement, coordination, sensory perception, learning, memory, reward, emotions, hormonal function, and body temperature. The CB2R
has been implicated as relevant in immune modulation. Since the discovery of the CB1R and
CB2R, major advances in cannabinoid pharmacology and physiology have taken place, including
the recognition that phytocannabinoids such as CBD, CBN, and THC have immune modulatory
properties. However, while immune modulatory effects of THC have been linked to the CB2R,
those of CBD and CBN have been attributed generally to noncannabinoid receptor-mediated
actions.

14.2 Effects of phytocannabinoids on the immune system
14.2.1 In vivo models

Experimental animals have offered unique insights into the effects of phytocannabinoids on
immune function. Due to their well-defined immune systems, statistically significant data with
minimal confounding variables have been obtained. Rosenkrantz et al. (1975) administered THC
to rats before, during, and after intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of sheep red blood cells (sRBCs)
and found a reduction in the induction and production of anti-sRBC antibodies. Zimmerman
et al. (1977) compared the effects of CBD, CBN, and THC on the antibody response and found
that THC elicited a dose-dependent depression of immune responsiveness while CBD and
CBN did not, suggesting a specificity of action. Baczynsky et al. (1983a, 1983b) examined the
effects of CBD, CBN, and THC on the primary and secondary antibody immune responses to
sRBCs in mice. While CBD and CBN elicited no effect, THC administered during the primary

262

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

immunization period suppressed the primary (i.e., immunoglobulin M (IgM)) antibody response
but when administered during the secondary immunization period had no effect. Jan et al. (2007)
reported that CBD attenuated the serum level of IgM and IgG anti-ovalbumin (OVA) antibodies
in OVA-sensitized mice.
Phytocannabinoids have also been reported to dampen cytokine responses. Malfait et al. (2000)
reported that CBD blocked the production of inflammatory cytokines associated with disease
progression in a collagen-induced rheumatoid arthritis DBA/1 mouse model. Draining lymph
node cells from CBD-treated mice exhibited decreased levels of interferon (IFN)-γ while knee
synovial cells yielded decreased release of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α. CBD was shown also to
block bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced increase in serum TNF-α in C57/BL mice. Weiss
et al. (2006, 2008) reported that CBD lowered the incidence of diabetes in nonobese diabetes-prone
mice. This decrease was accompanied by reduced plasma levels of IFN-γ and TNF-α, lowered proinflammatory cytokine production in vitro, and augmented production of the anti-inflammatory
cytokines interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-10. El-Remessy et al. (2006) reported that CBD reduced oxidative stress, retinal neuronal cell death, and vascular permeability in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced
diabetic rats, effects that are associated with increased levels of TNF-α, vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), and the intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1. Esposito et al. (2007) indicated
that CBD inhibited inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOs) and IL-1β expression in an amyloidbeta injected mouse model of Alzheimer disease-related neuroinflammation. Borrelli et al. (2009)
examined the effect of intracolonic administration of CBD in a mouse model of dinitrobenzene
sulfonic acid (DNBS)-induced colitis and noted that disease improvement was accompanied by a
decrease in the level of IL-1β. Recently, Liu et al. (2010) reported that CBD attenuated delayed-type
hypersensitivity (DTH) by suppressing T-lymphocyte and macrophage reactivity to subcutaneous OVA challenge to the footpads of mice sensitized previously with OVA. CBD suppressed the
infiltration of T lymphocytes and macrophages in the footpad and inhibited the expression of the
proinflammatory cytokines IFN-γ and TNF-α while augmenting the level of the anti-inflammatory
cytokine IL-10. Thus, CBD promotes a switch in cytokine profile from that of a proinflammatory
(Th1) type to that of an anti-inflammatory (Th2) type in a number of animal models.
The effects of phytocannabinoids on immune function appear to differ with age. Pross et al.
(1990) examined THC-mediated suppression of mouse lymphoid cell proliferative responses to
the mitogens concanavalin A (ConA) and phytohemagglutinin (PHA) in adult versus juvenile
mice. Thymus cells were suppressed more readily than spleen cells in adults while spleen cells
from mice under 2 weeks of age were suppressed more readily than those from older mice. Snella
et al. (1995) found that lymphoid cells from 2- and 18-month-old mice, as compared with adult
mice, were resistant to THC-mediated proliferation when stimulated by their CD3 receptor.
Ramarathinam et al. (1997) demonstrated that lymphoid cells from young and old mice exhibited
different immunological responses to THC in terms of their ability to produce cytokines following stimulation with either ConA or anti-CD3 antibody. Levels of IL-4 and IL-10 were upregulated in spleen cell cultures from the older animals. In vivo administration of THC resulted in an
upregulation of the proliferative response of lymphoid cells from young adult mice.
14.2.2 In vitro/ex vivo models
14.2.2.1 Effects on mixed cell populations

In order to garner insight regarding the immunocyte population targeted by phytocannabinoids,
mixed cell and purified immunocyte subpopulations (Table 14.1) have been examined. Lefkowitz
and Klager (1978) assessed the effect of in vivo THC administration on in vitro sRBC sensitization

Phytocannabinoids and the Immune System

Table 14.1 Major immune cell types in humans
Immune cell types

Function

% of leukocyte
population†

Cannabinoid receptor
expression

B lymphocytes

Antibody production; antigen
presentation (MHCII)

1–7%

CB2R >>CB1R

CD4+ T lymphocytes

Cell-mediated immunity

4–20%

CB2R

Th1

inflammation (TGF-β, IFN-γ)

Th2

Antibody-mediated immunity (IL-4,
IL-5, IL-13)

Treg

Immune homeostasis (IL-10, TGF-β)

CD8+ T lymphocytes

Kill virally infected cell and tumor
cells

2–11%

CB2R >CB1R

Macrophages/monocytes

Phagocytosis; process/present
antigen (MHCII); chemokine/
cytokine secretion

2–12%

CB2R >CB1R

Microglia

Resident macrophage of CNS

Natural killer cells

Rapid innate immune response,
release cytolytic factors to induce
apoptosis/lysis of infected cells

CB2R >CB1R
1–6%

CB2R >CB1R

† leukocytes account for 0.1–0.2% of blood cells.

Data from Galiegue, S., Mary, S., and Marchand, J., et al., Expression of central and peripheral cannabinoid receptors in
human immune tissues and leukocyte subpopulations. European Journal of Biochemistry, 232, pp. 54–61 © 1995, John
Wiley and Sons, Inc and Graham, E.S., Angel, C.E., Schwarcz, L.E., Dunbar, P.R., and Glass, M., Detailed characterisation
of CB2 receptor protein expression in peripheral blood immune cells from healthy human volunteers using flow cytometry, International Journal of Immunopathology and Pharmacology, 23, pp.25–34 © 2010, BIOLIFE, s.a.s.

of mouse splenic lymphocytes. THC depressed the anti-sRBC antibody response, an outcome
that was obtained when THC was added directly in vitro. Baczynsky et al. (1983b) reported that
CBD, CBN, and THC acted differentially on mouse spleen cells in vitro since CBN did not depress
the primary immune response. Pross et al. (1992) found that, when ConA or PHA was used to
stimulate THC-treated splenocytes, a downregulation of lymphocyte proliferation occurred. In
contrast, when splenocytes were stimulated directly with anti-CD3 antibody that ligates to CD3
on T lymphocytes and activates their proliferation, THC at low concentrations enhanced proliferation. It was indicated also that THC suppressed the expression of IL-2 and the IL-2 receptor. The
T-cell mitogen anti-CD3 produced an opposite effect when combined with THC since it increased
T-lymphocyte proliferation and the response of IL-2. Nakano et al. (1992) demonstrated that THCrelated modulation of IL-2 activity corresponded with changes in blastogenic activity and with variation in numbers of Tac antigen-positive cells, T lymphocytes that are activated in the autologous
mixed lymphocyte reaction that regulate the generation of killer T cells. Jan et al. (2007) found that
i.p. injection of CBD resulted in suppression of antigen-specific antibody production and inhibition of splenocyte production of IL-2 and IFN-γ in OVA-sensitized mice upon ex vivo stimulation.
14.2.2.2 Effects on mononuclear cells, macrophages, and macrophage-like cells

Phytocannabinoids have been reported to suppress macrophage phagocytosis, bactericidal activity, and cell spreading (Friedman et al. 1991; Klein and Friedman 1990) and to alter cytokine

263

264

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

expression. Zheng et al. (1992) indicated that THC caused a decrease in TNF-α production by
mouse peritoneal macrophages in response to LPS and IFN-γ. Fisher-Stenger et al. (1993) examined the effects of THC on TNF-α production by mouse RAW264.7 macrophage-like cells and
reported that it altered its conversion from a 26-kDa presecretory form to the 17 kDa secretory
product. Klein and Friedman (1990) indicated that the activity of IL-1 increased in supernatants
of mouse macrophage cultures treated with LPS and THC. The higher activity was attributed to
increase in release of the premature IL-1α and mature IL-1β forms. A subsequent report suggested
that Bcl-2 and caspase-1 (i.e., IL-1 converting enzyme that proteolytically cleaves the precursor
form of IL-1β) played a role in this process (Zhu et al. 1998). Steffens et al. (2005), using a mouse
model of atherosclerosis, showed that oral administration of THC resulted in inhibition of disease
progression associated with lymphoid cell diminished proliferation and IFN-γ secretion.
THC also has been reported to alter cytokine expression by microglia, macrophage-like cells
resident in the central nervous system (CNS) and eye. Puffenbarger et al. (2000) reported that
THC caused a reduction in levels of LPS-induced rat microglial mRNAs for IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6,
and TNF-α. This reduction was linked to neither the CB1R nor the CB2R. Chang et al. (2001)
using mouse J774 macrophage-like cells compared the effects of THC with those of the endocannabinoids, anandamide (AEA), and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), and of indomethacin
morpholinylamide (IMMA). A differential effect was exerted since THC, IMMA, and AEA
diminished LPS-induced nitric oxide (NO) and IL-6 production, while 2-AG inhibited the production of IL-6.
CBD also alters the expression of cytokines by macrophage-like cells. Weiss et al. (2006) indicated that the production of Th1 (i.e., proinflammatory) cytokines by ex vivo activated peritoneal macrophages was reduced in CBD-treated mice, whereas that of Th2-associated (i.e.,
anti-­inflammatory) cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-10 was increased. El-Remessy et al. (2008)
using a rat model of diabetes and glaucoma, reported that CBD inhibited LPS-induced production of TNF-α and NO in rat microglia. Kozela et al. (2010) demonstrated that CBD and
THC decreased the production and release of IL-1β, IL-6, and IFN-β from LPS-activated mouse
BV-2 microglial-like cells. The anti-inflammatory action appeared not to involve the CB1R, the
CB2R, or the abnormal (abn)-CBD-sensitive receptor. De Filippis et al. (2011) reported that CBD
reduced intestinal inflammation through a process that involved control at the level of the neuroimmune axis. CBD counteracted reactive enteric gliosis in LPS-treated mice through the reduction of astroglial signaling by neurotrophin S100B. The S100B decrease was associated with fewer
mast cells and macrophages in the intestine. Moreover, treatment of LPS-mice with CBD reduced
TNF-α expression. Similar results were obtained with cultures of colonic biopsies from ulcerative
colitis patients. The activity of CBD was attributed, at least in part, to activation of the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-γ pathway. Juknat et al. (2012b) found that CBD affected
the expression of mouse BV-2 cell genes involved in zinc homeostasis, suggesting that regulation
of zinc levels could be a means through which CBD exerted its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
effects. Juknat et al. (2012a) also reported that CBD and THC elicited a differential transcriptional
profile in BV-2 cells since CBD altered the expression of many more genes. The CBD-stimulated
genes were implicated as under the control of nuclear factors known to be involved in the regulation of stress responses and inflammation.
Phytocannabinoids also have been reported to alter a variety of other macrophage-like cell
functions. Burnette-Curley and Cabral (1995) reported that THC inhibition of cell contactdependent tumor cell cytolysis was linked to targeting of a TNF-dependent pathway. Coffey et al.
(1996) implied that an early step in NO production by mouse peritoneal macrophages, such as NO
synthase (NOS) gene transcription or NOS synthesis, was affected by THC. A structure–activity

Phytocannabinoids and the Immune System

order of effectiveness in inhibition was noted for THC analogs used with potency being highest for Δ8-tetrahydrocannabinol and decreasing in order for THC >CBD ≥11-OH-THC >CBN.
The investigators concluded that inhibition of NO was mediated partly by a stereoselective cannabinoid receptor/cAMP pathway and partly by a nonselective molecular process. Jeon et al.
(1996), using the mouse RAW264.7 macrophage cell line, demonstrated that THC inhibited NOS
transcription factors such as nuclear factor (NF)-κB/RelA, suggesting a mode by which this cannabinoid altered NO production. THC has also been reported to alter macrophage processing
of antigens that is necessary for the activation of CD4+ T lymphocytes (McCoy et al. 1995). The
THC-mediated processing defect was shown to involve the CB2R (McCoy et al. 1999). This observation was confirmed by Buckley et al. (2000) using knockout mice with a targeted deletion for
the CB2R. Matveyeva et al. (2000) suggested that THC caused an antigen-dependent defect in the
ability of macrophages to activate T-helper cells in a CB2R-linked fashion by selectively increasing
aspartyl cathepsin D proteolytic activity. Chuchawankul et al. (2004) reported that the CB2R also
played a role in THC-mediated inhibition of macrophage function by targeting costimulatory
activity. Carrier et al. (2006) found that THC and CBD inhibited mouse EOC-20 microglial cell
proliferation through inhibition of adenosine uptake, consistent with a cannabinoid receptorindependent mode of action for CBD-induced decreased inflammation.
In addition, phytocannabinoids have been shown to alter the migratory activities of macrophage-­
like cells. Sacerdote et al. (2005) reported that CBD decreased chemotaxis of mouse macrophages
in vivo and in vitro in response to the peptide fMet-Leu-Phe. Walter et al. (2003) reported that
CBN and CBD inhibited microglial cell migration in response to the endocannabinoid 2-AG.
The migration enhancing effect of 2-AG was reported to occur through the CB2R and the abnCBD-sensitive receptor, with subsequent activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase
1/2 signal transduction pathway. CBN and CBD prevented the 2-AG-induced cell migration by
antagonizing the two receptors. Rajesh et al. (2010) indicated that CBD attenuated high glucoseinduced monocyte adhesion to endothelial cells and reduced transendothelial monocyte migration.
14.2.2.3 Effects on B lymphocytes

B lymphocytes express relatively high levels of the CB2R (Carayon et al. 1998; Galiègue et al. 1995;
Lynn and Herkenham 1994). Thus, it is not surprising that functional activities of these immune
cells are affected by phytocannabinoids acting through this receptor. Klein et al. (1985) noted that
the addition of THC to mouse splenocyte cultures suppressed B lymphocytes in response to LPS.
Derocq et al. (1995) reported that THC at low nanomolar concentrations had an enhancing effect
on human tonsillar B-cell growth. It was proposed that the growth-enhancing activity observed
on B cells at very low concentrations of THC was mediated through the CB2R.
14.2.2.4 Effects on T lymphocytes

Nahas and colleagues reported as early as 1977 that THC altered human T-lymphocyte functions
(Nahas et al. 1977). Numerous investigators since have expanded on this observation. Klein et al.
(1991) found that THC altered the activity of mouse cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) through a
step beyond the binding of the CTL to its target cell. THC appeared to suppress the development
of CTLs from precursors to mature cells. Fischer-Stenger et al. (1992) found that THC inhibited
CTL cytoplasmic polarization toward herpes simplex virus (HSV)-infected target cells. CTL
granule reorientation toward the target cell that followed cell–cell conjugation occurred at a lower
frequency in co-cultures containing CTLs from THC-treated mice. Yebra et al. (1992) examined
the effect of THC on mobilization of cytosolic free calcium [Ca2+], one of the earliest events in

265

266

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

T-cell activation, and suggested that the proliferation defect in THC-treated lymphocytes was
related to inhibition of [Ca2+] mobilization. Karmaus et al. (2012) reported that THC suppression
of CTL function occurred independently of the CB1R and CB2R. An allogeneic model of major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) I mismatch was used to elicit CTLs in CB1R/CB2R double
knockout mice to determine the requirement for these receptors. THC suppressed CTL function
independently of the CB1R and CB2R.
Schatz et al. (1993) proposed that THC selectively inhibited T-cell-dependent humoral (i.e.,
antibody) immune responses. Oral administration of THC to mice produced a selective inhibition of primary antibody (i.e., IgM) responses to the T-cell-dependent antigen sRBC. In contrast,
no inhibitory effect on antibody responses to the T-cell-independent antigen DNP-Ficoll was
obtained. Phytocannabinoid-mediated defects in cytokine expression also have been reported.
Condie et al. (1996) found that treatment of murine thymoma-derived EL4T cells with CBN or
THC disrupted the adenylate cyclase signaling cascade by inhibiting forskolin-stimulated cAMP
accumulation. It was suggested that inhibition of the adenylate cyclase/cAMP signal transduction pathway led to T-cell dysfunction by decreasing the level of IL-2 gene transcription. Jan et
al. (2002) reported that CBN enhanced IL-2 expression by T cells that was associated with an
increase in IL-2 distal nuclear factor of activated T cell (NFAT) activity. Enhancement of IL-2 was
demonstrated also with THC and CBD, suggesting that the enhanced effect was not unique to
CBN. It was indicated that increased IL-2 secretion by CBN was mediated through the enhancement of IL-2 gene transcription through activation of NF-AT in a CB1R/CB2R-independent manner. Yuan et al. (2002) stimulated human T cells with allogeneic dendritic cells and reported that
THC suppressed T-cell proliferation, inhibited the production of IFN-γ and shifted the balance of
Th1/Th2 cytokines. It was indicated that THC decreased the steady-state levels of mRNA encoding for Th1 cytokines, while increasing those for Th2 cytokines by a CB2R-dependent pathway.
In order to gain insight into the mechanisms involved in phytocannabinoid-mediated T-cell
dysfunction, Rao and Kaminski (2006) investigated the ability of various cannabinoid compounds
to elevate intracellular calcium concentration [Ca2+]i in CB2R-expressing human peripheral
blood acute lymphoid leukemia (HPB-ALL) T cells. It was found that the [Ca2+]i elevation elicited
by CBN and compounds structurally similar to THC was independent of the CB1R and CB2R.
Lee et al. (2008) demonstrated that thymocytes and EL-4 thymoma cells were susceptible to CBDinduced apoptosis and suggested a role for reactive oxygen species in the induction of apoptosis.
Lu et al. (2009) reported that THC suppressed the expression of an inducible co-­stimulatory
(ICOS) receptor related to CD28 that is essential for T-lymphocyte activation and function.
Inhibition of this receptor appeared to occur at the transcriptional level through THC-mediated
modulation of NFAT signaling. Rao et al. (2004) suggested that cannabinoid receptors were linked
to T-lymphocyte dysfunction by inducing an influx of extracellular calcium in resting cells. THC
elevated [Ca2+]i in purified murine splenic T cells and the HPB-ALL but had a minimal effect on
human Jurkat E6-1 cells that exhibit dysfunctional expression of the CB2R. Rao and Kaminski
(2006) reported that the induction of [Ca2+]i elevation by THC in T lymphocytes involved transient receptor potential channel (TRPC)1 channels, ion channels that are located on the plasma
membrane. It was concluded that the THC-induced elevation in [Ca2+]i was attributable to extracellular calcium influx, which is independent of [Ca2+]i store depletion and was mediated, at least
partially, through diacylglycerol-sensitive TRPC1 channels.
On the other hand, Borner et al. (2007) implicated a role for the CB1R in T-lymphocyte dysfunction. It was reported that transcription of the CB1R gene was induced in response to THC,
whereas the CB2R gene was not. However, the induction of CB1R gene expression was found to
be mediated by the CB2R, the consequent upregulation facilitating or enhancing T-lymphocyte

Phytocannabinoids and the Immune System

immunomodulatory effects related to phytocannabinoids. The release of IL-4 protein from these
cells was proposed as necessary for the induction of the CB1R gene. Recently, Lombard et al.
(2011) reported that perinatal exposure of mice to THC triggers defects in T-cell differentiation
and function in fetal and postnatal stages of life. These THC-mediated outcomes were attributed
to activation of cannabinoid receptors. Thymic atrophy induced in the fetus correlated with
caspase-­dependent apoptosis in thymocytes. Perinatal exposure to THC also had a profound
effect on the immune response during postnatal life.
14.2.2.5 Effects on natural killer cells

Kawakami et al. (1988) reported that THC suppressed IL-2-induced killing activity and proliferation using the NKB61A2 natural killer (NK) cell line (Warner and Dennert 1982). Similarly, THC
was reported to suppress proliferation of murine spleen cells stimulated with recombinant human
IL-2. In addition, spleen cells previously stimulated in culture with IL-2, and then incubated with
THC prior to addition to target cells, displayed suppressed cytolytic activity. The results indicated
that THC could suppress IL-2-linked functions, including clonal expansion of lymphocytes,
expansion of killer cell populations, and stimulation of killer cell cytotoxic activity. Studies have
shown also that THC suppresses the killing activity of mouse and human NK cells (Klein et al.
1998a, 1998b). This THC-mediated inhibition has been attributed partly to a decrease in the
number of high-affinity and intermediate-affinity IL-2 binding sites, suggesting suppression in
the expression of IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) proteins (Zhu et al. 1993). Indeed, THC has since been
shown to increase cellular levels of IL-2Rα and β proteins, to decrease levels of the γ-protein, and
to decrease the function of the IL-2R (Zhu et al. 1995). It was concluded that THC disturbed the
relative expression of various IL-2R chains, resulting in overall receptor dysfunction and responsiveness to IL-2. Daaka et al. (1997), using NKB61A2 cells, suggested a functional link of the CB1R
to these THC-mediated effects and implicated involvement of the universal transcription factor
NF-κB and the IL-2Rα gene. Massi et al. (2000) reported that THC administered to mice resulted
in inhibition of NK cytolytic activity and a reduction in production of IFN-γ. It was suggested that
the CB1R and CB2R were both involved in the THC-affected network that mediated NK cytolytic
activity.
14.2.2.6 Effects on cytokines

The collective data suggest that select phytocannabinoids such as THC and CBD alter the expression of cytokines (Table 14.2). They converge to inhibit the production of the Th1-type (i.e., proinflammatory) cytokines while promoting that of the Th2-type (anti-inflammatory) cytokines,
although the respective mechanisms may differ. Blanchard et al. (1986) and Cabral et al. (1986a)
reported that the induction of IFN-α/β was suppressed by THC treatment of mice. Watzl et al.
(1991) reported that cytokine activity in cultured human peripheral blood mononuclear cells was
modulated by THC. CBD also modulated cytokine production and/or secretion, leading to the
suggestion that a noncannabinoid receptor-mediated mode of action was involved. Berdyshev
et al. (1997) examined the effects of THC on the production of TNF-α, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10,
IFN-γ, p55, and, p75 TNF-α soluble receptors by stimulated human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. THC exerted a biphasic effect on Th1 cytokine production in that TNF-α, IL-6, IL-8,
and INF-γ synthesis was inhibited by a low concentration of THC (i.e., 3 nM) but stimulated by
a high concentration of THC (i.e., 3 μM). Srivastava et al. (1998) examined the effect of THC and
CBD on cytokine production by human leukemic T, B, eosinophilic, and CD8+ NK lines in vitro.
THC decreased the constitutive production of IL-8, macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1α,
MIP-1β, and RANTES (regulated upon activation normal T-cell expressed and secreted) protein.

267

268

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Table 14.2 Select cytokines produced by immune cells
Cytokine

Producing immune cell

Action

IL-1α/β

Monocytes/macrophages,
microglia, B lymphocytes,
dendritic cells, endothelial cells

Proinflammatory, acute inflammation, fever, acute
phase protein production

IL-4

T lymphocytes, mast cells

Anti-inflammatory, B- and T-lymphocyte differentiation
factor

IL-6

T lymphocytes, monocytes/
macrophages, microglia,
endothelial cells

Proinflammatory, acute inflammation, fever, acute
phase protein productionAnti-inflammatory, inhibits
TNF-α and IL-1, activates IL-10, B- and T-lymphocyte
differentiation factor

IL-8

Macrophages, microglia,
endothelial cells, epithelial cells

Proinflammatory, chemotactic factor for neutrophils
and T lymphocytes; activates neutrophils

IL-10

Monocytes/macrophages,
microglia, Th2 and Treg
lymphocytes, B lymphocytes

Anti-inflammatory, inhibits proinflammatory cytokine
production, suppresses antigen presentation capacity
of APCs

IL-12

Macrophages, microglia,
dendritic cells, B lymphocytes

Proinflammatory, stimulates differentiation of CD4 T
cells to Th1, stimulates production of TNF-α and IFN-γ

IFN-γ

T lymphocytes (Th1, CD8+),
natural killer cells

Proinflammatory, activates macrophages, stimulates
differentiation of CD4 T cells to Th1 while suppressing
Th2

TNF-α

Macrophages, microglia, CD4+ T
lymphocytes, natural killer cells

Proinflammatory, localized inflammation, fever

Phorbol ester-stimulated production of TNF-α, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and IFN-γ by NK cells also was affected. These results indicated that THC and
CBD could alter production of cytokines across a diverse array of immune cell lineages.
It is highly relevant that phytocannabinoids have been reported to alter the expression of
chemokines and cytokines in various disease paradigms. Zhu et al. (2000) reported that THC promoted tumor growth by inhibiting antitumor immunity by a CB2R-mediated, cytokine-dependent
pathway. Levels of the immune inhibitory Th2 cytokines IL-10 and transforming growth factor
(TGF) were augmented while those of the immune stimulatory Th1 cytokine IFN-γ were downregulated at both the tumor site and in the spleens of THC-treated mice. McKallip et al. (2005)
reported that exposure of mice to THC led to elevated tumor growth and metastasis of the mouse
mammary carcinoma 4T1 due to inhibition of the specific antitumor immune response in vivo.
Exposure to THC led to increased production of IL-4 and IL-10 and suppression of the antitumor
immune response was mediated primarily through the CB2R. Li et al. (2001) reported that THC
had an immunosuppressive effect in STZ-induced autoimmune diabetes. In addition to ablating
the elevation in serum glucose and loss of pancreatic insulin, it reduced STZ-induced levels of
IFN-γ, TNF-α, and IL-12 mRNA. El-Remessy et al. (2006) found that CBD treatment of STZinduced diabetic rats reduced oxidative stress, decreased levels of TNF-α, VEGF, and ICAM-1,
and prevented retinal cell death and vascular hyperpermeability in the retina. Napimoga et al.
(2009) reported that CBD decreased bone resorption by inhibiting RANK/RANKL expression
and proinflammatory cytokines during experimental periodontitis in rats. Gingival tissues from
the CBD-treated rats showed decreased neutrophil migration associated with lower production

Phytocannabinoids and the Immune System

of IL-1β and TNF-α. Ribeiro et al. (2012) demonstrated that administration of CBD prior to
the induction of LPS-induced acute lung injury decreased neutrophil migration into the lungs,
albumin concentration in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, myeloperoxidase activity in the lung
tissue, and the production of the cytokines TNF and IL-6 and the chemokines monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1 and macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-2. Li et al. (2012)
suggested that CBD played an anti-inflammatory role in i.p. cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis
in C57BL mice. CBD treatment improved the pathological changes of mice with acute pancreatitis
and decreased levels of IL-6 and TNF-α. De Filippis et al. (2011) investigated the effect of CBD
using intestinal biopsies from patients with ulcerative colitis and from intestinal segments of mice
with LPS-induced intestinal inflammation. Treatment of LPS-mice with CBD reduced the level of
TNF-α. Similar results were obtained in ex vivo cultured human-derived colonic biopsies.

14.3 Effects of phytocannabinoids on host resistance to viral,

bacterial, and fungal infections
14.3.1 In vitro infections

In view of the multiplicity of effects on immunity in vivo and in vitro, it is not surprising that
phytocannabinoids have been implicated in modulating resistance to a variety of infectious
agents. Blevins and Dumic (1980) indicated that THC exerted a protective effect against HSV
infection in vitro. On the other hand, THC has been reported to inhibit macrophage extrinsic
anti-HSV activity (Cabral and Vásquez 1991, 1992), a process whereby macrophages normally
suppress virus replication in the virus-infected cells to which they attach (Morahan et al. 1980;
Stohlman et al. 1982). Noe et al. (1998) reported that THC enhanced syncytia formation in MT-2
cells infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), a process that has been reported
to serve as an indicator of HIV infection and cytopathicity. Raborn and Cabral (2010) reported
that THC inhibited human U937 macrophage-like cell migration to the trans-activating (Tat)
protein of HIV-1 and that this effect was linked to the CB 2R. Fraga and Raborn et al. (2011)
showed that THC also inhibited migration of BV-2 microglial-like cells to the HIV protein Tat.
Recently, Chen et al. (2012), using a surrogate mouse model to induce polyclonal T cell responses
against gp120, the major envelope glycoprotein of HIV, reported that THC altered mouse CD8+
T cell proliferation and the gp120-specific CTL response dependent on the magnitude of the
IFN-γ response.
Phytocannabinoids have also been reported to alter resistance to microbial agents other
than viruses. Arata et al. (1991, 1992) reported that THC could overcome the restriction of
the growth of Legionella pneumophila, a facultative intracellular pathogen that replicates in
macrophages. While pretreatment of macrophages with THC did not affect ingestion or replication of Legionella, treatment following infection resulted in increased numbers of intracellular
bacteria. Stimulation of macrophages with LPS resulted in a reduction in Legionella growth.
Furthermore, treatment of these LPS-activated macrophages with THC resulted in greater
growth of Legionella, indicating that THC abolished the LPS-induced enhanced resistance. Gross
et al. (2000) reported that THC ablated infection of macrophages by the intracellular gramnegative bacterium Brucella suis. THC also has been reported to alter the capacity of macrophages to kill Naegleria fowleri (Burnette-Curley et al. 1993), the causative agent of primary amoebic
meningoencephalitis (PAME) (Marciano-Cabral 1988), and to decrease neonatal rat microglial
levels of mRNA for IL-1α, IL-1β, and TNF-α elicited in response to Acanthamoeba (Cabral and
Marciano-Cabral, 2004).

269

270

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

14.3.2 In vivo infections

Bradley et al. (1977) demonstrated that THC enhanced the susceptibility of mice to live or killed
gram-negative bacteria. Subsequently, Morahan et al. (1979) demonstrated that mice exposed to
THC were compromised in their ability to resist infection to Listeria monocytogenes or to HSV-2.
Mishkin and Cabral (1985) and Cabral et al. (1986a, b) demonstrated that THC increased the susceptibility to HSV-2 genital infection in guinea pigs and mice based on greater severity of herpes
genitalis, higher mortalities, and higher mean titers of virus shed from the vagina. Cabral et al.
(1986b) also noted that THC caused a reduction of the splenocyte proliferative response to HSV-2.
Buchweitz et al. (2007) reported that THC increased influenza A viral load and decreased macrophage and lymphocyte recruitment into the lungs. It was indicated that effects on the immune
and airway epithelial cell responses to challenge with influenza A virus in THC-treated mice
involved both CB1R/CB2R-dependent and -independent mechanisms (Buchweitz et al. 2008). In
addition, THC (dronabinol) treatment has been reported to lead to severity of disease in mice
infected with vaccinia virus (Huemer et al. 2011). Paradise and Friedman (1993), using a hamster
model of syphilis, indicated that THC enhanced infection with Treponema pallidum. A greater
degree of enhancement was exhibited also in rabbits in that treponemes proliferated more readily
during treatment with THC. Also, Marciano-Cabral et al. (2001) reported that THC exacerbated
brain infection in mice by Acanthamoeba spp.
There is also evidence that phytocannabinoids have the ability to alter resistance to retroviruses. Specter et al. (1991) reported that THC augmented murine retroviral-induced immunosuppression and infection. THC administered in vitro to spleen cells from mice infected with
Friend leukemia virus (FLV) resulted in a decrease, beyond that seen with virus or THC alone,
in lymphocyte blastogenesis and NK cell activity. When both FLV and THC were administered
to mice concurrently infected with HSV, mortality attributed to FLV infection occurred significantly more rapidly than in the absence of HSV or THC. Roth et al. (2005) reported that THC
suppressed immune function and enhanced HIV replication in the huPBL-SCID mouse. In
this hybrid model, human peripheral blood leukocytes (huPBLs) were implanted into severe
combined immunodeficient mice (huPBL-SCID) followed by infection with an HIV reporter
construct in the presence or absence of THC exposure. The results suggested that exposure
to THC in vivo suppressed immune function, increased the expression of CCR5 and CXCR4
chemokine receptors that serve as HIV co-receptors, and acted as a cofactor to significantly
enhance HIV replication. On the other hand, Winsauer et al. (2011) using the simian immune
deficiency virus (SIV)-infected rhesus macaque model of HIV infection, demonstrated that
chronic administration of THC resulted in a decrease in neuroinflammation and lower viral load
in the CNS. Similarly, Molina et al. (2011) reported that chronic THC administration decreased
early mortality from SIV infection in macaques, and that this outcome was associated with attenuation of plasma and cerebral spinal fluid viral load and retention of body mass. It was speculated
that reduced levels of SIV, retention of body mass, and attenuation of inflammation were likely
modalities for THC-mediated moderation of disease progression. LeCapitaine et al. (2011) investigated whether prolonged THC administration affected lymphocyte counts, lymphocyte phenotype, and lymphocyte proliferation induced in young adult rhesus macaques infected with SIV
over a 12-month period. Chronic THC administration did not alter lymphocyte subtypes, naive
and memory subsets, and proliferation or apoptosis of T lymphocytes. However, an increase in
CXCR4 expression in both CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes was observed. It was suggested that
chronic THC administration produced changes in T-cell phenotype, a condition that, it has been
suggested, could contribute to host immunomodulation to infectious challenge.

Phytocannabinoids and the Immune System

14.4 Summary and conclusions
The mode through which phytocannabinoids such as THC and CBD converge to inhibit immune
functional activities has not been fully elucidated. These two phytocannabinoids exert a commonality of action by altering the production of chemokines and cytokines, usually causing a
switch from promoting elicitation of Th1 cytokines such as IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-2 to that
of Th2 cytokines such as IL-10 and IL-4 (Cabral and Marciano-Cabral, 2004; Klein et al. 2000; Lu
et al. 2006; Newton et al. 1994). However, phytocannabinoids such as THC have been reported to
induce cytokine-mediated mortality of mice infected with L. pneumophila by augmenting proinflammatory responses, thereby exacerbating infection and disease (Klein et al. 1993). Smith et al.
(1997) examined the effects of CBD and CBN on sublethal infection of inbred BALB/c mice, animals that are relatively resistant to infection with L. pneumophila. Mice receiving THC before and
after infection exhibited higher levels of bacteria in their lungs compared to sublethally infected
mice not receiving phytocannabinoid. In addition, lung levels of mRNA for IL-6 were increased
markedly following treatment of infected animals with THC.
The mechanisms that come into play for CBD versus THC in mediating anti-inflammatory
events have not been resolved. THC inhibitory effects on immune cell migration appear to be
linked to the CB2R. However, CBD and THC converge to alter cytokine/chemokines expression but may do so by disparate modes of action. Newton et al. (2009) demonstrated that IFN-γ
production was dependent upon signaling through IL-12Rβ2, that THC treatment suppressed
splenic β2 message, and that these effects were cannabinoid receptor dependent. Using IL-4
deficient mice, it was observed that increases in IL-4 induced by THC were not involved in the
phytocannabinoid effect on β2. It was suggested that both the CB1R and the CB2R mediated the
THC-induced shift in T-helper activity in L. pneumophila-infected mice, with the CB1R involved
in suppressing IL-12Rβ2 and the CB2R involved in enhancing the trans-activating T-cell specific
transcription factor GATA-3.
The recognition that CBD is nonpsychoactive and has immune modulatory properties suggests a potential for its therapeutic application. Several modes of action have been proposed for
its therapeutic potential. For example, El Remessy et al. (2006) indicated that CBD reduced neurotoxicity, inflammation, and blood–retinal barrier breakdown in STZ-induced diabetic rats. It
also has been reported that CBD blocks N-methyl-D-aspartate-, LPS-, or diabetes-induced retinal
damage (El Remessy et al. 2003, 2006, 2008). Carrier et al. (2006) reported that CBD inhibited
adenosine uptake by acting as a competitive inhibitor at the equilibrative adenosine nucleoside
transporter. Hedge et al. (2011) proposed that CBD acted through TRPV1 vanilloid receptors
on myeloid-derived suppressor cells that are induced at sites of inflammation and that suppress
T-cell functions. CBD has also been reported to induce apoptosis in immortalized lymphocytes,
primary lymphocytes, and monocytes. Gallily et al. (2003) reported that γ-irradiation of cultured human HL-60 myeloblastic leukemia cells enhanced apoptosis that was induced by CBD,
while monocytes from normal individuals were resistant to either CBD or γ-irradiation. Wu et
al. (2010) demonstrated that CBD enhanced apoptosis of freshly isolated monocytes, whereas
precultured monocytes were insensitive to CBD. Wu et al. (2012) reported that CBD-induced
apoptosis in BV-2 microglial-like cells was mediated through lipid rafts. It was suggested that a
proapoptotic effect in microglia occurred through lipid raft coalescence and elevated expression
of GM1 ganglioside and caveolin-1.
Although phytocannabinoids such as CBD and THC have been documented to alter immune
function in vitro and in experimental animals, a definitive role in susceptibility to infection and/
or disease progression in humans remains elusive (Abrams et al. 2003; Bredt et al. 2002; Chao et al.

271

272

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

2008; Struwe et al. 1993). Nevertheless, elucidation of the mechanisms of action through which
phytocannabinoids alter immune activities has provided novel insights as to the functional relevance of cannabinoid receptors within the human. Studies on the action of phytocannabinoids
on immune cells using experimental animals have led to the identification of an endogenous or
endocannabinoid system that is characterized by specific ligands, cognate receptors, and linked
metabolizing enzymes. The recognition that CBD has immunomodulatory properties while
exhibiting minimal psychotropic effects offers the possibility of its consideration for adjunct therapeutic application, particularly since it has low toxicity, is highly lipophilic, and is bioavailable in
the CNS. Investigation of other phytocannabinoids present in cannabis that are not psychoactive,
such as cannabigerol, cannabichromene, cannabidivarin, and tetrahydrocannabivarin should
reveal whether these also have immunomodulatory properties that have therapeutic potential.
Finally, an understanding of the mode through which phytocannabinoids alter immune function
and target specified signal transductional cascades has yielded novel insights into the engineering
of molecules that have potential for dampening inflammatory responses that are associated with
a variety of human pathological processes.

Acknowledgments
Supported by National Institutes of Health awards 1R01 DA005832 and 1R01 DA029532.

References
Abrams, D.I., Hilton, J.F., Leiser, R.J., et al. (2003). Short-term effects of cannabinoids in patients with
HIV-1 infection: a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Annals of Internal Medicine, 139,
258–266.
Arata, S., Klein, T.W., Newton, C., and Friedman, H. (1991). Tetrahydrocannabinol treatment suppresses
growth restriction of Legionella pneumophila in murine macrophage cultures. Life Sciences, 49, 473–479.
Arata, S., Newton, C., Klein, T., and Friedman, H. (1992). Enhanced growth of Legionella pneumophila
in tetrahydrocannabinol-treated macrophages. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and
Medicine, 199, 65–67.
Baczynsky, W.O. and Zimmerman, A.M. (1983a). Effects of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabinol
and cannabidiol on the immune system in mice. I. In vivo investigation of the primary and secondary
immune response. Pharmacology, 26, 1–11.
Baczynsky, W.O. and Zimmerman, A.M. (1983b). Effects of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabinol and
cannabidiol on the immune system in mice. II. In vitro investigation using cultured mouse splenocytes.
Pharmacology, 26, 12–19.
Berdyshev, E.V., Boichot, E., Germain, N., Allain, N., Anger, J.P., and Lagente, V. (1997). Influence of
fatty acid ethanolamides and delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on cytokine and arachidonate release by
mononuclear cells. European Journal of Pharmacology, 330, 231–240.
Blanchard, D.K., Newton, C., Klein, T.W., Stewart, W.E., and Friedman, H. (1986). In vitro and in vivo
suppressive effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on interferon production by murine spleen cells.
International Journal of Immunopharmacology, 8, 819–824.
Blevins, R.D. and Dumic, M.P. (1980). The effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on herpes simplex virus
replication. Journal of General Virology, 49, 427–431.
Borner, C., Hollt, V., Sebald, W., and Kraus, J. (2007). Transcriptional regulation of the cannabinoid
receptor type 1 gene in T cells by cannabinoids. Journal of Leukocyte Biology, 81, 336–343.
Borrelli, F., Aviello, G., Romano, B., et al. (2009). Cannabidiol, a safe and non-psychotropic ingredient
of the marijuana plant Cannabis sativa, is protective in a murine model of colitis. Journal of Molecular
Medicine, 87, 1111–1121.

Phytocannabinoids and the Immune System

Bradley, S.G., Munson, A.E., Dewey, W.L., and Harris, L.S. (1977). Enhanced susceptibility of mice to
combinations of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and live or killed gram-negative bacteria. Infection and
Immunity, 17, 325–329.
Bredt, B.M., Higuera-Alhino, D., Shade, S.B., Hebert, S.J., McCune, J.M., and Abrams, D.I. (2002).
Short-term effects of cannabinoids on immune phenotype and function in HIV-1-infected patients.
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 42, 82S–89S.
Buchweitz, J., Karmaus, P., Harkema, J., Williams, K., and Kaminski, N. (2007). Modulation of airway responses to influenza A/PR/8/34 by Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in C57Bl/6 mice. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 323, 675–683.
Buchweitz, J.P., Karmaus, P.W., Williams, K.J., Harkema, J.R., and Kaminski, N.E. (2008). Targeted deletion of cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2 produced enhanced inflammatory responses to influenza
A/PR/8/34 in the absence and presence of Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of Leukocyte Biology,
83, 785–796.
Buckley, N.E., McCoy, K.L., Mezey, E., et al. (2000). Immunomodulation by cannabinoids is absent in
mice deficient for the cannabinoid CB2 receptor. European Journal of Pharmacology, 396, 141–149.
Burnette-Curley, D. and Cabral, G.A. (1995). Differential inhibition of RAW264.7 macrophage tumoricidal activity by delta 9tetrahydrocannabinol. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and
Medicine, 210, 64–76.
Burnette-Curley, D., Marciano-Cabral, F., Fischer-Stenger, K., and Cabral, G.A. (1993).
Delta- 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol inhibits cell contact-dependent cytotoxicity of Bacillus CalmetteGuerin-activated macrophages. International Journal of Immunopharmacology, 15, 371–382.
Cabral, G.A., Lockmuller, J.C., and Mishkin, E.M. (1986b). Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol decreases alpha/
beta interferon response to herpes simplex virus type 2 in the B6C3F1 mouse. Proceedings of the Society
for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 181, 305–311.
Cabral, G.A. and Marciano-Cabral, F. (2004). Cannabinoid-mediated exacerbation of brain infection by
opportunistic amebae. Journal of Neuroimmunology, 147, 127–30.
Cabral, G.A., Mishkin, E.M., Marciano-Cabral, F., Coleman, P., Harris, L., and Munson, A.E. (1986a).
Effect of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol on herpes simplex virus type 2 vaginal infection in the guinea
pig. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 182, 181–186.
Cabral, G.A. and Vasquez, R. (1991). Effects of marijuana on macrophage function. Advances in
Experimental Medicine and Biology, 288, 93–105.
Cabral, G.A. and Vasquez, R. (1992). Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol suppresses macrophage extrinsic antiherpesvirus activity. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 199, 255–263.
Carrier, E.J., Auchampach, J.A., and Hillard, C.J. (2006). Inhibition of an equilibrative nucleoside transporter by cannabidiol: a mechanism of cannabinoid immunosuppression. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103, 7895–7900.
Carayon, P., Marchand, J., Dussossoy, D., et al. (1998). Modulation and functional involvement of CB2
peripheral cannabinoid receptors during B-cell differentiation. Blood, 92, 3605–3615.
Chang, Y.H., Lee, S.T., and Lin, W.W. (2001). Effects of cannabinoids on LPS-stimulated inflammatory
mediator release from macrophages: involvement of eicosanoids. Journal of Cellular Biochemistry, 81,
715–723.
Chao, C., Jacobson, L.P., Tashkin, D., et al. (2008). Recreational drug use and T lymphocyte subpopulations in HIV uninfected and HIV-infected men. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 94, 165–171.
Chen, W., Kaplan, B.L., Pike, S.T., et al. (2012). Magnitude of stimulation dictates the cannabinoid-­
mediated differential T cell response to HIVgp120. Journal of Leukocyte Biology, 92, 1093–1102.
Chuchawankul, S., Shima, M., Buckley, N.E., Hartmann, C.B., and McCoy, K.L. (2004). Role of cannabinoid
receptors in inhibiting macrophage costimulatory activity. International Immunopharmacology, 4, 265–278.
Coffey, R.G., Snella, E., Johnson, K., and Pross, S. (1996). Inhibition of macrophage nitric oxide production
by tetrahydrocannabinol in vivo and in vitro. International Journal of Immunopharmacology, 18, 749–752.

273

274

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Condie, R., Herring, A., Koh, W.S., Lee, M., and Kaminski, N.E. (1996). Cannabinoid inhibition of adenylate cyclase-mediated signal transduction and interleukin 2 (IL-2) expression in the murine T-cell
line, EL4.IL-2. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 271, 13175–13183.
Daaka, Y., Zhu, W., Friedman, H., and Klein, T.W. (1997). Induction of interleukin-2 receptor alpha gene
by delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol is mediated by nuclear factor kappaB and CB1 cannabinoid receptor.
DNA and Cell Biology, 16, 301–309.
De Filippis, D., Esposito, G., Cirillo, C., et al. (2011). Cannabidiol reduces intestinal inflammation through
the control of neuroimmune axis. PLoS One, 6, e28159.
Derocq, J.M., Segui, M., Marchand, J., Le Fur, G., and Casellas, P. (1995). Cannabinoids enhance human
B-cell growth at low nanomolar concentrations. FEBS Letters, 369, 177–182.
El-Remessy, A., Al-Shabrawey, M., Khalifa, Y., Tsai, N., Caldwell, R.B., and Liou, G. (2006).
Neuroprotective and blood-retinal barrier-preserving effects of cannabidiol in experimental diabetes.
American Journal of Pathology, 168, 235–244.
El-Remessy, A., Khalil, I., Matragoon, S., et al. (2003). Neuroprotective effect of (-) Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol in N-methyl-D-aspartate-induced retinal neurotoxocity: involvement of peroxynitrite. American Journal of Pathology, 163, 1997–2008.
El-Remessy, A., Tang, Y., Zhu, G., et al. (2008). Neuroprotective effects of cannabidiol in endotoxininduced uveitis: critical role of p38 MAPK activation. Molecular Vision, 14, 2190–2203.
Esposito, G., Scuderi, C., Savani, C., et al. (2007). Cannabidiol in vivo blunts β-amyloid induced neuroinflammation by suppressing IL-1β and iNOS expression. British Journal of Pharmacology, 151,
1272–1279.
Fischer-Stenger, K., Dove Pettit, D.A., and Cabral, G.A. (1993). Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol inhibition
of tumor necrosis factor-alpha: suppression of post-translational events. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 267, 1558–1565.
Fischer-Stenger, K., Updegrove, A.W., and Cabral, G.A. (1992). Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol decreases
cytotoxic T lymphocyte activity to herpes simplex virus type 1-infected cells. Proceedings of the Society
for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 200, 422–430.
Fraga, D., Raborn, E.S., Ferreira, G.A., and Cabral, G.A. (2011). Cannabinoids inhibit migration of
microglial-like cells to the HIV protein Tat. Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology, 6, 566–577.
Friedman, H., Klein, T., and Specter, S. (1991). Immunosuppression by marijuana components. In: R.
Ader, D.L. Felten, and N. Cohen (eds.). Psychoneuroimmunology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press,
pp. 931–953.
Gallily, R., Even-Chena, T., Katzavian, G., Lehmann, D., Dagan, A., and Mechoulam, R. (2003). Gammairradiation enhances apoptosis induced by cannabidiol, a non-psychotropic cannabinoid, in cultured
HL-60 myeloblastic leukemia cells. Leukemia and Lymphoma, 44, 1767–1773.
Galiegue, S., Mary, S., Marchand, J., et al. (1995). Expression of central and peripheral cannabinoid receptors in human immune tissues and leukocyte subpopulations. European Journal of Biochemistry, 232,
54–61.
Graham, E.S., Angel, C.E., Schwarcz, L.E., Dunbar, P.R., and Glass, M. (2010). Detailed characterisation
of CB2 receptor protein expression in peripheral blood immune cells from healthy human volunteers
using flow cytometry. International Journal of Immunopathology and Pharmacology, 23, 25–34.
Gross, A., Terraza, A., Marchant, J., et al. (2000). A beneficial aspect of a CB1 cannabinoid receptor antagonist: SR141716A is a potent inhibitor of macrophage infection by the intracellular pathogen Brucella
suis. Journal of Leukocyte Biology, 67, 335–344.
Hegde, V.L., Nagarkatti, P.S., and Nagarkatti, M. (2011). Role of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in
amelioration of experimental autoimmune hepatitis following activation of TRPV1 receptors by cannabidiol. PLoS One, 6, e18281.
Huemer, H.P., Lassnig, C., Bernhard, D., et al. (2011). Cannabinoids lead to enhanced virulence of the
smallpox vaccine (vaccinia) virus. Immunobiology, 216, 670–677.

Phytocannabinoids and the Immune System

Jan, T.R., Rao, G.K., and Kaminski, N.E. (2002). Cannabinol enhancement of IL-2 expression by T
cells is associated with an increase in IL-2 distal nuclear factor of activated T cell activity. Molecular
Pharmacology, 61, 446–454.
Jan, T.R., Su, S.T., Wu, H.Y., and Liao, M.H. (2007). Suppressive effects of cannabidiol on antigen-specific
antibody production and functional activity of splenocytes in ovalbumin-sensitized BALB/c mice.
International Immunopharmacology, 7, 773–780.
Jeon, Y.J., Yang, K.H., Pulaski, J.T., and Kaminski, N.E. (1996). Attenuation of inducible nitric oxide
synthase gene expression by delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol is mediated through the inhibition of nuclear
factor- kappa B/Rel activation. Molecular Pharmacology, 50, 334–341.
Juknat, A., Pietr, M., Kozela, E., et al. (2012a). Differential transcriptional profiles mediated by exposure to
the cannabinoids cannabidiol and Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in BV-2 microglial cells. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 165, 2512–2528.
Juknat, A., Rimmerman, N., Levy, R., Vogel, Z., and Kozela, E. (2012b). Cannabidiol affects the expression of genes involved in zinc homeostasis in BV-2 microglial cells. Neurochemistry International, 61,
923–930.
Karmaus, P.W., Chen, W., Kaplan, B.L., and Kaminski, N.E. (2012). Delta(9)-Tetrahydrocannabinol
suppresses cytotoxic T lymphocyte function independent of CB1 and CB 2, disrupting early activation
events. Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology, 7, 843–855.
Kawakami, Y., Klein, T.W., Newton, C., Djeu, J.Y., Specter, S., and Friedman, H. (1988). Suppression
by delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol of interleukin 2-induced lymphocyte proliferation and lymphokineactivated killer cell activity. International Journal of Immunopharmacology, 10, 485–488.
Klein, T.W. and Friedman, H. (1990). Modulation of murine immune cell function by marijuana components. In: R. Watson (ed.). Drugs of Abuse and Immune Function. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 87–111.
Klein, T.W., Friedman, H., and Specter, S. (1998a). Marijuana, immunity and infection. Journal of
Neuroimmunology, 83, 102–115.
Klein, T.W., Kawakami, Y., Newton, C., and Friedman, H. (1991). Marijuana components suppress induction and cytolytic function of murine cytotoxic T cells in vitro and in vivo. Journal of Toxicology and
Environmental Health, 32, 465–477.
Klein, T.W., Newton, C., and Friedman, H. (1998b). Cannabinoid receptors and immunity. Immunology
Today, 19, 373–381.
Klein, T.W., Newton, C.A., Nakachi, N., and Friedman, H. (2000). Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol treatment suppresses immunity and early IFN-gamma, IL-12, and IL-12 receptor beta 2 responses to
Legionella pneumophila infection. Journal of Immunology, 164, 6461–6466.
Klein, T.W., Newton, C.A., Widen, R., and Friedman, H. (1985). The effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
and 11-hydroxy-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on T-lymphocyte and B-lymphocyte mitogen responses.
Journal of Immunopharmacology, 7, 451–466.
Klein, T.W., Newton, C., Widen, R., and Friedman, H. (1993). Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol injection induces cytokine-mediated mortality of mice infected with Legionella pneumophila. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 267, 635–640.
Kozela, E., Pietr, M., Juknat, A., Rimmerman, N., Levy, R., and Vogel, Z. (2010). Cannabinoids Delta(9)tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol differentially inhibit the lipopolysaccharide-activated NF-kappaB
and interferon-beta/STAT proinflammatory pathways in BV-2 microglial cells. The Journal of Biological
Chemistry, 285, 1616–1626.
LeCapitaine, N.J., Zhang, P., Winsauer, P., et al. (2011). Chronic Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol administration increases lymphocyte CXCR4 expression in rhesus macaques. Journal of Neuroimmune
Pharmacology, 6, 540–545.
Lee, C.Y., Wey, S.P., Liao, M.H., Hsu, W.L., Wu, H.Y., and Jan, T.R. (2008). A comparative study
on cannabidiol-induced apoptosis in murine thymocytes and EL-4 thymoma cells. International
Immunopharmacology, 8, 732–740.

275

276

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Lefkowitz, S.S., and Klager, K. (1978). Effect of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on in vitro sensitization of
mouse splenic lymphocytes. Immunological Communications, 7, 557–566.
Li, K., Feng, J.Y., Li, Y.Y., et al. (2012). Anti-inflammatory role of cannabidiol and O-1602 in ceruleininduced acute pancreatitis in mice. Pancreas, 42, 123–129.
Li, X., Kaminski, N.E., and Fischer, L.J. (2001). Examination of the immunosuppressive effect of
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in streptozotocin-induced autoimmune diabetes. International
Immunopharmacology, 4, 699–712.
Liu, D.Z., Hu, C.M., Huang, C.H., Wey, S.P., and Jan, T.R. (2010). Cannabidiol attenuates delayed-type
hypersensitivity reactions via suppressing T-cell and macrophage reactivity. Acta Pharmacologica Sinica,
31, 1611–1617.
Lombard, C., Hegde, V.L., Nagarkatti, M., and Nagarkatti, P.S. (2011). Perinatal exposure to Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol triggers profound defects in T cell differentiation and function in fetal and postnatal stages of life, including decreased responsiveness to HIV antigens. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 339, 607–617.
Lu, H., Kaplan, B.L., Ngaotepprutaram, T., and Kaminski, N.E. (2009). Suppression of T cell costimulator
ICOS by Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of Leukocyte Biology, 85, 322–329.
Lu, T., Newton, C., Perkins, I., Friedman, H, and Klein, T. (2006). Role of cannabinoid receptors in delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol suppression of IL-12p40 in mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cells infected
with Legionella pneumophila. European Journal of Pharmacology, 532, 170–177.
Lynn, A.B. and Herkenham, M. (1994). Localization of cannabinoid receptors and nonsaturable highdensity cannabinoid binding sites in peripheral tissues of the rat: implications for receptor-mediated
immune modulation by cannabinoids. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 268,
1612–1623.
Malfait, A.M., Gallily, R., Sumariwalla, P.F., et al. (2000). The nonpsychoactive cannabis constituent cannabidiol is an oral anti-arthritic therapeutic in murine collagen-induced arthritis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 97, 9561–9566.
Marciano-Cabral, F.M. (1988). Biology of Naegleria spp. Microbiological Reviews, 52, 114–133.
Marciano-Cabral, F.M., Ferguson, T., Bradley, S.G., and Cabral, G.A. (2001). Delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the major psychoactive component of marijuana, exacerbates brain infection by Acanthamoeba. Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, Suppl, 4S–5S.
Massi, P., Fuzio, D., Vigano, D., Sacerdote, P., and Parolaro, D. (2000). Relative involvement of cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors in the Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol-induced inhibition of natural killer
activity. European Journal of Pharmacology, 387, 343–347.
Matveyeva, M., Hartmann, C.B., Harrison, M.T., Cabral, G.A., and McCoy, K.L. (2000). Delta(9)tetrahydrocannabinol selectively increases aspartyl cathepsin D proteolytic activity and impairs
lysozyme processing by macrophages. International Journal of Immunopharmacology, 22, 373–381.
McCoy, K.L., Gainey, D., and Cabral, G.A. (1995). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol modulates antigen processing by macrophages. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 273, 1216–1223.
McCoy, K.L., Matveyeva, M., Carlisle, S.J., and Cabral, G.A. (1999). Cannabinoid inhibition of the
processing of intact lysozyme by macrophages: evidence for CB2 receptor participation. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 289, 1620–1625.
McKallip, R.J., Nagarkatti, M., and Nagarkatti, P.S. (2005). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol enhances
breast cancer growth and metastasis by suppression of the antitumor immune response. Journal of
Immunology, 174, 3281–3289.
Mishkin, E.M. and Cabral, G.A. (1985). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol decreases host resistance to
herpes simplex virus type 2 vaginal infection in the B6C3F1 mouse. Journal of General Virology, 66,
2539–2549.
Molina, P., Winsauer, P., Zhang, P., et al. (2011). Cannabinoid administration attenuates the progression
of simian immunodeficiency virus. AIDS Research and Human Retroviruses, 27, 585–592.

Phytocannabinoids and the Immune System

Morahan, P.S., Klykken, P.C., Smith, S.H., Harris, L.S., and Munson, A.E. (1979). Effects of cannabinoids
on host resistance to Listeria monocytogenes and herpes simplex virus. Infection and Immunity, 23,
670–674.
Morahan, P.S., Morse S.S., and McGeorge M.G. (1980). Macrophage extrinsic antiviral activity during herpes simplex virus infection. Journal of General Virology, 46, 291–300.
Nahas, G.G., Morishima, A., and Desoize, B. (1977). Effects of cannabinoids on macromolecular synthesis
and replication of cultured lymphocytes. Federation Proceedings, 36, 1748–1752.
Nakano, Y., Pross, S.H., and Friedman, H. (1992). Modulation of interleukin 2 activity by delta-9-­
tetrayhydrocannabinol after stimulation with concanavalin A, phytohemagglutinin, or anti-CD3 antibody. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 201, 165–168.
Napimoga, M.H., Benatti, B.B., Lima, F.O., et al. (2009). Cannabidiol decreases bone resorption by inhibiting RANK/RANKL expression and pro-inflammatory cytokines during experimental periodontitis in
rats. International Immunopharmacology, 9, 216–222.
Newton, C.A., Chou, P.J., Perkins, I., and Klein, T.W. (2009). CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors mediate
different aspects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-induced T helper cell shift following immune
activation by Legionella pneumophila infection. Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology, 4, 92–102.
Newton, C.A., Klein, T.W., and Friedman, H. (1994). Secondary immunity to Legionella pneumophila
and Th1 activity are suppressed by delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol injection. Infection and Immunity, 62,
4015–4020.
Noe, S.N., Nyland, S.B., Ugen, K., Friedman, H., and Klein, T.W. (1998). Cannabinoid receptor agonists
enhance syncytia formation in MT-2 cells infected with cell free HIV-1MN. Advances in Experimental
Medicine and Biology, 437, 223–229.
Paradise, L.J. and Friedman, H. (1993). Syphilis and drugs of abuse. Advances in Experimental Medicine
and Biology, 335, 81–87.
Pross, S.H., Klein, T.W., Newton, C., Smith, J., Widen, R., and Friedman, H. (1990). Age-related suppression of murine lymphoid cell blastogenesis by marijuana components. Developmental and Comparative
Immunology, 14, 131–137.
Pross, S.H., Nakano, Y., Widen, R., et al. (1992). Differing effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) on murine spleen cell populations dependent upon stimulators. International Journal of
Immunopharmacology, 14, 1019–1027.
Puffenbarger, R.A., Boothe, A.C., and Cabral, G.A. (2000). Cannabinoids inhibit LPS-inducible cytokine
mRNA expression in rat microglial cells. Glia, 29, 58–69.
Raborn, E.S. and Cabral, G.A. (2010). Cannabinoid inhibition of macrophage migration to the trans-­
activating (Tat) protein of HIV-1 is linked to the CB2 cannabinoid receptor. Journal of Pharmacology
and Experimental Therapeutics, 333, 319–327.
Rajesh, M., Mukhopadhyay, P., Bátkai, S., et al. (2010). Cannabidiol attenuates high glucose-induced
endothelial cell inflammatory response and barrier disruption. American Journal of Physiology, 293,
H610–H619.
Ramarathinam, L., Pross, S., Plescia, O., Newton, C., Widen, R., and Friedman, H. (1997). Differential
immunologic modulatory effects of tetrahydrocannabinol as a function of age. Mechanisms of Ageing
and Development, 96, 117–126.
Rao, G.K. and Kaminski, N.E. (2006). Induction of intracellular calcium elevation by Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol in T cells involves TRPC1 channels. Journal of Leukocyte Biology, 79, 202–213.
Rao, G.K., Zhang, W., and Kaminski, N.E. (2004). Cannabinoid receptor-mediated regulation of intracellular calcium by delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol in resting T cells. Journal of Leukocyte Biology, 75,
884–892.
Ribeiro, A., Ferraz-de-Paula, V., Pinheiro, M.L., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol, a non-psychotropic plantderived cannabinoid, decreases inflammation in a murine model of acute lung injury: role for the
adenosine A(2A) receptor. European Journal of Pharmacology, 678, 78–85.

277

278

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Rosenkrantz, H., Miller, A.J., and Esber, H.J. (1975). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol suppression of the primary immune response in rats. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, 1, 119–125.
Roth, M.D., Tashkin, D.P., Whittaker, K.M., Choi, R., and Baldwin, G.C. (2005). Tetrahydrocannabinol
suppresses immune function and enhances HIV replication in the huPBL-SCID mouse. Life Sciences,
77, 1711–1722.
Sacerdote, P., Martucci, C., Vaccani, A., et al. (2005). The nonpsychoactive component of marijuana cannabidiol modulates chemotaxis and IL-10 and IL-12 production of murine macrophages both in vivo
and in vitro. Journal of Neuroimmunology, 159, 97–105.
Schatz, A.R., Koh, W.S., and Kaminski, N.E. (1993). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol selectively inhibits
T-cell dependent humoral immune responses through direct inhibition of accessory T-cell function.
Immunopharmacology, 26, 129–137.
Smith, M.S., Yamamoto, Y., Newton, C., Friedman, H., and Klein, T. (1997). Psychoactive cannabinoids
increase mortality and alter acute phase cytokine responses in mice sublethally infected with Legionella
pneumophila. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 214, 69–75.
Snella, E., Pross, S., and Friedman, H. (1995). Relationship of aging and cytokines to the immunomodulation by delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on murine lymphoid cells. International Journal of
Immunopharmacology, 17, 1045–1054.
Specter, S., Lancz, G., Westrich, G., and Friedman, H. (1991). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol augments murine retroviral induced immunosuppression and infection. International Journal of
Immunopharmacology, 13, 411–417.
Srivastava, M.D., Srivastava, B.I., and Brouhard, B. (1998). Delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol
alter cytokine production by human immune cells. Immunopharmacology, 40, 179–185.
Steffens, S., Veillard, N.R., Arnaud, C., et al. (2005). Low dose oral cannabinoid therapy reduces progression of atherosclerosis in mice. Nature, 434, 782–786.
Stohlman, S.A., Woodward, J.G., and Frelinger, J.A. (1982). Macrophage antiviral activity: extrinsic versus
intrinsic activity. Infection and Immunity, 36, 672–677.
Struwe, M., Kaempfer, S.H., Geiger, C.J., et al. (1993). Effect of dronabinol on nutritional status in HIV
infection. The Annals of Pharmacotherapy, 27, 827–831.
Walter, L., Franklin, A., Witting, A., et al. (2003). Nonpsychotropic cannabinoid receptors regulate microglial cell migration. The Journal of Neuroscience 23, 1398–1405.
Warner, J.F. and Dennert, G. (1982). Effects of a cloned cell line with NK activity on bone marrow transplants, tumour development and metastasis in vivo. Nature, 300, 31–34.
Watzl, B., Scuderi, P., and Watson, R.R. (1991). Marijuana components stimulate human peripheral blood
mononuclear cell secretion of interferon-γ and suppress interleukin-1 alpha in vitro. International
Journal of Immunopharmacology, 13, 1091–1097.
Weiss, L., Zeira, M., Reich, S., et al. (2006). Cannabidiol lowers incidence of diabetes in non-obese diabetic
mice. Autoimmunity, 39, 143–151.
Weiss, L., Zeira, M., Reich, S., et al. (2008). Cannabidiol arrests onset of autoimmune diabetes in NOD
mice. Neuropharmacology, 54, 244–249.
Winsauer, P.J., Molina, P.E., Amedee, A.M., et al. (2011). Tolerance to chronic delta-9-­
tetrahydrocannabinol (Delta(9)-THC) in rhesus macaques infected with simian immunodeficiency
virus. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 19, 154–172.
Wu, H.Y., Chang, A.C., Wang, C.C., et al. (2010). Cannabidiol induced a contrasting pro-apoptotic effect
between freshly isolated and precultured human monocytes. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 246,
141–147.
Wu, H.Y., Goble, K., Mecha, M., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol-induced apoptosis in murine microglial cells
through lipid raft. Glia, 60, 1182–1190.
Yebra, M., Klein, T.W., Friedman, H. (1992). Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol suppresses concanavalin A
induced increase in cytoplasmic free calcium in mouse thymocytes. Life Sciences, 51, 151–160.

Phytocannabinoids and the Immune System

Yuan, M., Kiertscher, S.M., Cheng, Q., Zoumalan, R., Tashkin, D.P., and Roth, M.D. (2002). Delta
9-Tetrahydrocannabinol regulates Th1/Th2 cytokine balance in activated human T cells. Journal of
Neuroimmunology, 133, 124–131.
Zheng, Z.M., Specter, S., and Friedman, H. (1992). Inhibition by delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol of
tumor necrosis factor alpha production by mouse and human macrophages. International Journal of
Immunopharmacology, 14, 1445–1452.
Zhu, L.X., Sharma, S., Stolina, M., et al. (2000). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol inhibits antitumor immunity by a CB2 receptor-mediated, cytokine-dependent pathway. Journal of Immunology, 165, 373–380.
Zhu, W., Friedman, H., and Klein, T.W. (1998). Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol induces apoptosis in
macrophages and lymphocytes: involvement of Bcl-2 and caspase-1. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 286, 1103–1109.
Zhu, W., Igarashi, T., Friedman, H., and Klein, T.W. (1995). Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
causes the variable expression of IL2 receptor subunits. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, 274, 1001–1007.
Zhu, W., Igarashi, T., Qi, Z.T., et al. (1993). Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) decreases the number
of high and intermediate affinity IL-2 receptors of the IL-2 dependent cell line NKB61A2. International
Journal of Immunopharmacology, 15, 401–408.
Zimmerman, S., Zimmerman, A.M., Cameron, I.L., and Laurence, H.L. (1977). Delta 1-tetrahydrocannabinol,
cannabidiol and cannabinol effects on the immune response of mice. Pharmacology, 15, 10–23.

279

Chapter 15

Non-Phytocannabinoid Constituents
of Cannabis and Herbal Synergy
John M. McPartland and Ethan B. Russo

15.1 Introduction
Therapeutic synergy is gaining respect in the medical world, and describes an interaction
between two or more drugs whose combined effect is greater than the sum of their individual
effects. Thanks to tractable research methods such as isobolographic analysis, the simultaneous administration of two or more drugs is no longer derided as “black box medicine.”
Polypharmacy has become the norm in clinical disciplines such as anesthesia, oncology, and
infectious disease.
Medicinal plants are inherently polypharmaceutical. Turner et al. (1980) tallied 420 constituents in herbal cannabis. The tally is now over 530, of which 108 are phytocannabinoids (Hanuš
2008). Practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) administer several medicinal plants
at once, which exponentially increases the polypharmacy. TCM practitioners have used cannabis
for centuries (see Russo, Chapter 2, this volume). One herbal remedy known as má zı̌ rén wán
(“hemp seed pill”), was prescribed by Zhāng Zhòngjı̌ng (c.150–219 ce). The exact same formulation is still in use today (Bensky et al. 1993).
Pharmacology as a science began with chemists isolating constituents from medicinal plants
and testing them for physiological activity. In 1804, Friedrich Sertürner began analyzing opium
extracted from poppy, Papaver somniferum. Not until 1817 did he unequivocally report the isolation of pure morphine (Huxtable and Schwarz 2001). Other early discoveries included caffeine
from Coffea arabica in 1819, quinine from Cinchona officinalis in 1820, nicotine from Nicotiana
tabacum in 1828, atropine from Atropa belladonna in 1831, cocaine from Erythroxylum coca in
1855, and digitoxin from Digitalis purpurea in 1869.
Cannabis drew attention early; Buchholz (1806) conducted the first analytical study, and he
extracted a crude resin. The polypharmaceutical resin stymied chemists for over 150 years in
their search for the “primary active ingredient.” The recalcitrant substance turned out to be a
terpenophenol, quite unlike the easy-to-isolate alkaloids listed earlier. Along the way, chemists
suspected the primary active ingredient was a component of the resin, an essential oil, or even an
alkaloid. Finally Raphael Mechoulam isolated and characterized delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(Δ9-THC) as the primary psychoactive ingredient (Gaoni and Mechoulam 1964). But barely 6
years later Roger Pertwee noted that THC did not act alone in cannabis (Gill et al. 1970).
This chapter begins with an inventory of nonphytocannabinoid constituents of Cannabis (the
plant) and cannabis (the plant product). We review the concepts of synergy, additivity, and antagonism, and their measurement. This is followed by a historical review of early research that demonstrated the impact of terpenoids upon phytocannabinoids and the endocannabinoid system.
Lastly we highlight twenty-first-century research.

Non-Phytocannabinoid Constituents of Cannabis and Herbal Synergy

15.2 Non-phytocannabinoid constituents
Buchholz (1806) extracted 1.6% resin from cannabis with ethyl alcohol. His yield was low, but we
wouldn’t expect much more, because Bucholz analyzed cannabis seed. He extracted much more
oil (19.1%) and protein (24.7%). Subsequently, Buchholz (1816) isolated “capsicin” (capsaicin)
from Spanish pepper. His decision to work on cannabis and capsaicin was prophetic: nearly 200
years later, the receptor that binds capsaicin, known as TRPV1, would be named “the ionotropic
cannabinoid receptor” (Di Marzo et al. 2002).
Tscheppe (1821) described hanfblätter (hemp foliage) as “narcotic.” Tscheppe isolated a brown
extract and a sweetish bitter extract, as well as chlorophyll, wood fiber, lignin, protein, and several
salts and minerals. He could not isolate the psychoactive ingredient, possibly because he analyzed
low-THC fiber-type German hemp. Schlesinger (1840) analyzed fresh flowering tops and isolated a green resinous ethanolic extract that Mechoulam (1973) characterized as “the first active
extract.” Schlesinger never described its activity beyond “bitter taste.” In retrospect, the odds of
finding the psychoactive ingredient were low because he also worked with hemp. O’Shaughnessy
(1838–1840) extracted a strongly psychoactive ingredient by boiling Indian gañjā in alcohol under
pressure. He subsequently utilized the ethanolic extract in many animal studies and clinical trials.
Bohlig (1840) extracted an essential oil from flowering tops of hemp. Essential oil is a volatile,
aromatic, hydrophobic liquid derived from plants by steam distillation or solvent extraction. We
now recognize the essential oil as a collection of terpenoid compounds. We use the term “terpenoid” broadly, to include terpenes and modified terpenes, where the methyl group has been
moved or removed, or oxygen atoms added. The unique smell of Cannabis arises from its volatile
terpenoids and not its phytocannabinoids. Bohling reasoned that the psychoactive ingredient was
volatile, because he experienced somnolence in a field of flowering hemp. The essential oil was
soporific, weakly anesthetic, and caused a headache when inhaled or taken internally.
Most terpenoids in cannabis are monoterpenoids (C10H16 template) and sesquiterpenoids
(C15H24 template). Glandular trichomes secrete terpenoids, and they account for up to 10% of
gland head contents (Potter 2009). No terpenoids are unique to Cannabis, but various types of
Cannabis produce unique terpenoid profiles (Fischedick et al. 2010a; Hillig 2004; Mediavilla
and Steinemann 1997; Nissen et al. 2010). Examples of terpenoids in cannabis are illustrated in
(Fig. 15.1).
On an industrial scale, field-cultivated Cannabis yields 1.3 L of essential oil per ton of undried
plants, or about 10 L ha−2 (Mediavilla and Steinemann 1997). Preventing pollination increases the
yield. Meier and Mediavilla (1998) obtained 18 L ha−2 from sinsemilla crops, versus 8 L ha−2 from
pollinated crops. In a greenhouse setting, Potter (2009) reported a much higher yield of 7.7 mL m−2,
equivalent to 77 L ha−2.
Smith and Smith (1847a) analyzed an ethanolic extract of gañjā. They isolated the active principle in a resin that tasted “balsamic” and not bitter, like morphine. They determined that the
active ingredient was neutral, “altogether destitute of basic properties” (i.e., not an alkaloid). The
Smith brothers gave it the name “cannabine” (Smith and Smith 1847b). Its neutral properties were
confirmed by de Courtive (1848), who obtained Algerian hashīsh from Jacques-Joseph Moreau.
De Courtive named the active ingredient “cannabin.”
Personne (in Robiquet 1857) acknowledged the discoveries of the Smith brothers, but reasoned
that another active principle was volatile, because hashīsh fumes were psychoactive. Personne distilled the essential oil and isolated two fractions that produced psychoactive effects. Valente (1880,
1881) also searched for a volatile principle in hemp, reasoning that workers in Italian hemp fields
became gay and giddy. Valente distilled a sesquiterpene (giving the formula as C15H24) from the

281

282

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

O

β-Caryophyllene

Caryophyllene oxide

H
α-Pinene

Limonene

OH

Fig. 15.1 Examples of terpenoids in cannabis: two
sesquiterpenoids and four
monoterpenoids.

Myrcene

D-Linalool

essential oil. Valieri (1887) tested the essential oil on human subjects. Inhalation of the essential
oil provided sedative effects, not unlike the essential oils distilled from other aromatic plants like
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) and mint (Mentha spp.). Valieri suggested its use immediately
prior to treatment with “stronger” preparations made from cannabis resin.
Wood et al. (1896) extracted a monoterpenoid (identified as C10H16) and a sesquiterpenoid
(identified as C15H24) from Punjabi charas. They described the physiological action of these substances: “In doses of 0.5 gram they have very little effect and produce none of the characteristic
symptoms of cannabis action.” Simonsen and Todd (1942) began to name individual terpenoids
in Cannabis. They extracted p-cymene (C10H14) and humulene (α-caryophyllene, C15H24) from
Egyptian hashīsh.
The list of terpenoids has steadily grown in modern studies that use utilize gas chromatography (GC). Dutt (1957) and Martin et al. (1961) established the presence of myrcene, limonene,
α-caryophyllene, and β-caryophyllene in Indian cannabis and Canadian feral hemp, respectively.
Nigam et al. (1965) isolated and identified 20 terpenoids from feral Kashmiri cannabis. They also
quantified individual terpenoid fractions: they measured the areas of individual GC peaks as a percentage of the total area under all GC peaks. The essential oil consisted largely of β-caryophyllene
(45.7%), followed by α-humulene (16.0%), with lesser percentages of other terpenoids in the single digits. Hendricks et al. (1975) listed 55 monoterpenoids and 33 sesquiterpenoids, eluted from
Cannabis sativa strain X obtained from birdseed.

Non-Phytocannabinoid Constituents of Cannabis and Herbal Synergy

Hood et al. (1973) investigated Cannabis “headspace,” the odor given off by Mexican cannabis,
demonstrating a qualitative difference between terpenoids in the headspace and terpenoids in the
essential oil. The headspace comprised mostly of monoterpenoids (α-pinene, β-pinene, myrcene,
limonene) whereas the processed essential oil consisted of less-volatile oxygenated monoterpenoids (α-terpinenol, linalool, fenchyl alcohol, borneol) and sesquiterpenoids (β-caryophyllene,
α-humulene, caryophyllene oxide). Stahl and Kunde (1973) tested seized hashīsh in which primarily the sesquiterpenoids remained. Seemingly, most of the monoterpenoids had out-gassed.
They determined that caryophyllene oxide (the oxidation product of β-caryophyllene) was the
volatile compound sensed by hashīsh detection dogs.
Ross and ElSohly (1996) measured the retention of essential oil in a “high potency hybrid.”
Freshly collected cannabis buds, yielded 0.29% v/w essential oil. Week-old buds air-dried at room
temperature and stored in a paper bag yielded 0.20%, a loss of 31%. One-month-old buds yielded
0.16%, a loss of 45%. After 3 months the buds yielded 0.13%, a loss of 55%. Freshly-collected
buds consisted of 92% monoterpenoids and 7% sesquiterpenoids. In 3-month-old buds the ratio
shifted to 62% monoterpenoids and 36% sesquiterpenoids. Their study identified three new
monoterpenoids and 14 new sesquiterpenoids not previously reported by Turner et al. (1980)—
bringing the total to 60 monoterpenoids and 51 sesquiterpenoids.
Cannabis also produces about 20 flavonoids, which are aromatic, polycyclic phenols. Quercetin,
apigenin, and cannaflavin A are anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, analgesic, and possibly prevent
cancer (McPartland and Russo 2001). Flavonoids may retain activity in cannabis smoke (Sauer
et al. 1983), but they do not vaporize at temperatures below combustion. Products created by
combustion show anti-inflammatory activity (Burstein et al. 1976; Spronck et al. 1978), and
resulting polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) may be responsible for antiestrogenic effects
(Lee et al. 2005). Other Cannabis compounds with pharmacological activity include phytosterols,
glycoproteins, alkaloids, and compounds that remain completely unidentified (Gill et al. 1970).

15.3 Synergy, additivity, and antagonism
Polypharmacy gives rise to pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug interactions.
Pharmacokinetic interactions arise when one drug alters the absorption, distribution, metabolism,
or excretion of another drug. For example, the distribution of L-DOPA across the blood–brain
barrier is enhanced by adding carbidopa, a combination drug called Sinemet®. Distribution in
this case becomes a factor of metabolism, because carbidopa inhibits dopa decarboxylase activity
in the periphery, thereby increasing the bioavailability of L-DOPA in the brain. Pharmacodynamic
interactions arise when one drug potentiates or diminishes the effect of another drug by targeting
different receptors or enzymes. For example, dry mouth caused by a sympathomimetic drug is
potentiated by an anticholinergic drug.
Fischedick et al. (2010b) tested the binding affinity of compounds at the CB1 receptor, and found
no statistically significant difference between pure Δ9-THC and cannabis smoke or vapor at equivalent concentrations of THC. Therefore synergy produced by other constituents in smoke or vapor
must occur via pharmacokinetic mechanisms or via pharmacodynamic interactions at other targets. One likely target is the endocannabinoid system (ECS). Two well-known ECS ligands are
N-arachidonylethanolamide (anandamide, AEA) and sn-2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG). AEA
and 2-AG activate several receptors: CB1, CB2, GPR55, and several transient receptor potential ion
channels (e.g., TRPV1, TRPV2, TRPA1, TRPM8). Other targets include the catabolic enzymes of
AEA and 2-AG: fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL), and cyclo-­
oxygenase 2 (COX2, prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase). We detail these findings in section 15.4.

283

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

6

Fig. 15.2 Isobologram analysis:
a “line of additivity” (dashed
line) is drawn between the
ED50 values of Drug A and
Drug B when given individually.
The isobole curve (double line)
plots five ED50 values when
Drug A and Drug B are coadministered at different doses.
The isobole bows well below
the line of additivity, indicating
a synergistic interaction.

Drug B concentration (mg/kg)

284

4

2

0

0

0.1
0.2
0.3
Drug A concentration (mg/kg)

Interactions between drugs are usually additive. Departures from additivity are either synergistic (“greater than the sum of the parts”) or antagonistic (“less than that expected” or infraadditive). Rector (1922) wrote about synergy, after defining the term, arising in combinations of
analgesic drugs. Rector combined Cannabis indica with morphine sulfate and magnesium sulfate.
Williamson (2001) reviewed the mathematical definitions of synergy. Pharmacologists such as
Borisy et al. (2003) cite the pioneering efforts of Walter Siegried Loewe (1884–1963).
Loewe (1928) invented the isobologram to test drug combinations for synergy, additivity, and
antagonism. The isobologram uses a two-coordinate graph of drug interactions (Fig. 15.2). The
concentrations of single drug A and single drug B that produce x% drug effect (usually EC50) are
plotted on the x- and y-axes. A line that connects two points corresponding to the same x% drug
effect becomes “the line of additivity.” Then the concentrations of both drugs together that produced the same effect are plotted on the graph. The concentrations of drugs interacting synergistically will be less than the sum of the individual components, and the isobole curve is said to be
“concave.” The concentrations of drugs interacting antagonistically will be greater than expected,
and produce a “convex” isobole (Fig. 15.2).
Loewe emigrated from Germany to the US in 1933, where he added cannabis to his studies of
multicomponent medicines and synergy. He demonstrated synergy arising from coadministration of cannabis with butyl-bromallyl-barbituric acid (Loewe 1940). During Congressional hearings regarding the Marihuana Tax Act, Loewe stated to Anslinger, “nobody knows whether there
is only one active principle or more than one active principle” (Bureau of Narcotics 1938). Loewe
(1945) reported that cannabinol (CBN) exhibited 4% of the potency of “charas tetrahydrocannabinol” in the dog ataxia test. Therefore cannabinol must be included among the compounds having
marihuana activity.” Loewe served as the pharmacology director of the LaGuardia Committee on
Marihuana (Loewe 1944), and he conducted the first human clinical trials with individual cannabinoids, including synthetic analogs (Loewe 1946).

15.4 Combinatorial synergy within cannabis
Well before synergy was defined, Prain (1893) demonstrated that more than one constituent contributed to cannabis psychoactivity. David Prain (FRS, University of Aberdeen 1857–1944) was
a physician-botanist who worked in India. His publication is not well known, and extremely rare
(four copies exist in libraries worldwide, according to WorldCat). Prain described “the distinctive

Non-Phytocannabinoid Constituents of Cannabis and Herbal Synergy

gánjá smell, a warm, aromatic, camphoraceous or peppermint-like smell.” After 1 year the gañjā
still smelled aromatic, but the camphoraceous or peppermint odor was gone. After 2 years the
aromatic odor diminished. After 3 years the smell was entirely depleted.
Prain weighed fresh gañjā, dried it in various ways, and then rehydrated and reweighed it.
Predictably, gañjā dried at 100°C lost more moisture than gañjā dried at room temperature. But
rehydration showed that gañjā dried at 100°C lost something more: “the volatile constituents were
driven off along with the moisture. Exposure to heat must therefore produce a permanent and
deleterious change in gánjá.”
He then extracted gañjā with a series of solvents including water, alcohol, ether, and petroleumether. He learned from the alcohol extract that “something is lost by gánjá during the first year of
storage.” Alcohol extracted the essential oil (i.e., terpenoids) that gave gañjā its characteristic odor.
He calculated that 6.2% of fresh, dried gañjā consisted of essential oil. Prain surmised:
It seems possible that to some extent the exciting and exhilarating effect of gánjá resides in an essential
oil, which almost disappears by the time the drug has been kept in store for a year. There still, however,
remains a considerable narcotic effect in gánjá of a year old, though it is much less marked than in fresh
ganja. [Italics added for emphasis]

Prain conducted physiological testing of various extracts in cats and isolated the “narcotic fraction” of gañjā in a “fixed oil” from the petroleum ether extract. Surprisingly, a resin extracted with
pure ether (not petroleum ether) was not active. Prain concluded:
A fixed oil becomes converted into a resin by being oxidised. The quantity of resin increases as the age
of the gánjá increases, and this increase can only happen at the expense of the substance that constitutes the active principle of the drug.

The petroleum ether contained what we now know as Δ9-THC, the ether contained CBN, its less
potent oxidation product.
Prain’s work was continued by David Hooper (1858–1947), appointed as “analyzer” for the
Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (IHDC) in 1892. Hooper tested samples of gañjā and charas
obtained from around the subcontinent. Hooper (1908) expanded his earlier analysis of charas.
He compared 24 samples, 15 from the IHDC report, plus five from Baluchistan, three from
Kashgar, and one from Simla. A sample from Kashgar (in modern-day Xinjiang) contained the
highest percentage of resin (48.1%). Hooper noted with curiosity that the perceived quality and
the cost of three specimens from Kashgar did not correlate with resin content: Grade No. 1, 40.2%;
Grade No. 2, 40.9%, Grade No. 3, 48.1%.
Hooper added an important analysis not reported in the IHDC report: percentage of essential oil. The Kashgar samples were highest. Intriguingly, the quality and cost of the Kashgar
samples correlated with their essential oil content: Grade No. 1 12.7%; Grade No. 2 12.4%;
Grade No. 3 12.0%.
Medieval literature indicates that Persian and Arabic physicians prescribed terpenoid-rich
citrus fruits to counter the intoxication caused by excessive cannabis (reviewed by Russo 2011):
Al-Rāzī (865–925 ad) wrote: “and to avoid these harms, one should drink fresh water and ice or
eat any acid fruits.” Ibn Sīnā (981–1037) and Ibn-al-Baitār (1197–1248) made similar recommendations. Citrus fruits and especially lemons have been used to treat cannabis overdoses by British
physicians (Christison 1850), American homeopaths (Hamilton 1852), Italian physicians (Polli
1865), Āyurvedic practitioners (Shanavaskhan et al. 1997), as well as early American hashīsh littérateurs (Calkins 1871; Ludlow 1857; Taylor 1855) and Afro-Jamaican Rastafarians (Schaeffer
1975). Āyurvedic practitioners espoused calamus root, from Acorus calamus, for countering the

285

286

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

side effects of cannabis (reviewed by McPartland et al. 2008). The use of pine nuts, pistachio nuts,
and terebinth resin, from Pinus and Pistacia species with their pinene content, also have a rich
tradition going back to medieval Arabic physicians and perhaps Pliny that suggest their use as
antidotes or modulators of THC intoxication by cannabis (reviewed in Russo 2011).

15.5 Modern synergy research
Beginning in the 1970s, a handful of researchers have studied synergy in herbal cannabis. Since
then, the pace of research has synergized (see the bottom row in Table 15.1). Gill et al. (1970) proposed that an acetylcholine-like component in whole cannabis extract potentiated the atropinic
action of THC (“cotton mouth”). Mechoulam et al. (1972) suggested that THC activity was influenced by other compounds present in herbal cannabis. They proposed that the smell of volatile
terpenoids caused a psychological conditioning that potentiated the effects of THC.
Kubena and Barry (1972) reported that rats trained to respond to THC actually showed a
greater response to an ethanolic cannabis extract, “a synergistic action of Δ9-THC with other
compounds in the extract.” Carlini et al. (1974) determined that cannabis extracts produced
effects “two or four times greater than that expected from their THC content.” Cannabis extracts
were ten times more potent than THC at inhibiting MAO activity in porcine brain (Schurr and
Livne 1976). A cannabis ethanol extract plus THC was more potent than an equal amount of THC
(Truitt et al. 1976). Fairbairn and Pickens (1981) detected the presence of unidentified “powerful
synergists,” in cannabis extracts, causing 330% greater activity in mice than THC alone. Cannabis
extracts provided greater analgesic activity than individual cannabinoids (Evans et al. 1987;
Formukong et al. 1988).

Table 15.1 Interest in Cannabis, its constituents, and synergistic effects, estimated by counting the
number of studies indexed by PubMed, binned by decadea
1950s

1960s

1970s

1980s

1990s

2000s

Cannabis

40

401

3098

1456

1907

5187

Tetrahydrocannabinol

0

29

1549

1111

1115

1967

Cannabidiol

0

2

169

159

102

353

Cannabinol

0

2

136

103

76

99

Tetrahydrocannabivarin

0

0

2

1

2

16

Cannabichromene

0

5

14

21

8

11

Cannabigerol

0

1

3

12

6

13

Cannabis AND terpenoidb

0

0

1

1

0

1

Cannabis AND flavonoidc

0

0

2

4

1

14

Cannabis AND synergyd

0

0

5

3

2

17

a PubMed is a free database accessing life science and biomedical journals, accessible at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

pubmed.
b Boolean combination of cannabis AND sesquiterpene OR monoterpene OR caryophyllene OR limonene OR linalool OR

myrcene OR pinene.
c Boolean combination of cannabis AND flavonoid OR flavone OR flavonol OR cannaflavin.
d Boolean combination of cannabis AND synergy OR synergism OR synergistic OR isobologram OR isobolographic.

Non-Phytocannabinoid Constituents of Cannabis and Herbal Synergy

The essential oil of cannabis, devoid of cannabinoids, retained analgesic (Segelman et al. 1974),
anti-inflammatory (Burstein et al. 1975), and perhaps even antidepressant effects (Hall 2008;
Russo et al. 2000). Terpenoids improve THC pharmacokinetics by increasing vasodilatation of
alveolar capillaries (which permits more absorption of THC by the lungs), and by increasing
blood–brain barrier permeability (Agrawal et al. 1989).
Individual terpenoids in cannabis essential oil have been assessed for therapeutic properties.
Russo (2011) listed some examples:
◆
◆

◆

◆

◆

β-myrcene is analgesic, anti-inflammatory, anti-convulsant, and a skeletal muscle relaxant.
β-caryophyllene is analgesic and anti-inflammatory, eases gut muscle spasms, and is technically a cannabinoid because it binds to CB2 receptors (but not the CB1 receptor so it is not
psychoactive).
D-limonene is an antioxidant, antidepressant and anticonvulsant, and blocks carcinogenesis
induced by benz[a]anthracene, one of the “tars” generated by the combustion of herbal cannabis.
D-linalool is sedative, anxiolytic, analgesic and anti-inflammatory, and induces apoptosis in
cancer cells.
α-pinene is anti-inflammatory, aids memory as an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, and causes
bronchodilation.

Russo (2011) reviewed a dozen mechanistic studies that demonstrate the effects of individual
terpenoids at clinically relevant dosages. For example, limonene is highly bioavailable with 70%
human pulmonary uptake; and 60% of pinene is bioavailable in a similar assay. Inhaling the aroma
of terpenoids decreases anxiety, imparts sedation, improves cognitive performance and EEG patterns of alertness in healthy volunteers.
Many studies have specifically identified cannabidiol (CBD) as an “entourage compound” in
cannabis that modulates the effects of THC (Russo and Guy 2006). Although Cascio and Pertwee
(Chapter 7, this volume) highlight CBD, we add some concepts here. CBD affects the pharmacokinetics of THC:
◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

Absorption—CBD is anti-inflammatory, which is one reason why inhaling cannabis smoke
caused less airway irritation and inflammation than inhaling pure THC (Tashkin et al. 1977).
Distribution—CBD is highly lipophilic, partitions into the lipid bilayer, and fluidizes membrane lipids (Howlett et al. 1989).
Distribution—CBD fluidizes cell membranes, increasing the penetration of THC into muscle
cells and thereby amplifying THC’s muscle-relaxant effects (Wagner 2004).
Metabolism—CBD inhibits the hepatic metabolism of drugs, including THC (Loewe 1944;
Paton and Pertwee 1972).
Metabolism—CBD inhibits two cytochrome P450 enzymes, 3A11 and 2C, that hydroxylate
THC to its metabolite 11-hydroxy-Δ9-THC (Bornheim et al. 1995, 1998).

CBD also alters endocannabinoid pharmacokinetics, by inhibiting FAAH hydrolysis of anandamide. Pharmacodynamically, CBD acts as a “synergistic shotgun,” all by itself, by promiscuously
targeting many receptors and signaling pathways. CBD enhances many benefits of THC (e.g.,
analgesic, anticarcinogenic, antiemetic, antiepileptic, anti-inflammatory, antispasmodic, and
neuroprotective effects). The importance of CBD led GW Pharmaceuticals to formulate Sativex®
as a 50:50 mixture of CBD and THC. ‘Sativex can be considered a CBD product with some THC
added” (G. Guy, personal communication, 2006).

287

288

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

The ability of CBD to decrease the adverse effects of THC permits the administration of higher
doses of the latter, thereby increasing the clinical efficacy and safety of cannabis-based extracts.
This “tale of two cannabinoids” (Russo and Guy 2006) is fascinating from an evolutionary perspective: Rottanburg et al. (1982) attributed a high incidence of cannabis-associated psychosis
in South Africa to the virtual absence of CBD in plants from that region. Black market Cannabis
breeders have selected plants for increased THC and decreased CBD, which may pose an increased
risk to psychologically susceptible individuals (Potter et al. 2008). Dozens of animal studies and
clinical trials have demonstrated CBD’s antipsychotic effects, possibly by activating TRPV1 and
attenuating dopaminergic effects (reviewed in Russo and Guy 2006) (Leweke et al. 2012; Morgan
and Curran 2008).
However, panic reaction and not psychosis is the primary side effect of THC (Weil 1970).
Animal studies and clinical trials have demonstrated the anxiolytic benefits of CBD, by suppressing tryptophan degradation, activating 5-HT1A (Russo et al. 2005), and decreasing adenosine
uptake (reviewed in Russo and Guy 2006).

15.6 The twenty-first century
The twenty-first century began early in the cannabis world: 1998 saw renewed interest in cannabis polypharmacy with a seminal review of therapeutic synergy (McPartland and Pruitt 1998).
The same year, Geoffrey Guy and Brian Whittle founded GW Pharmaceuticals on the concept of
synergy in whole cannabis extracts. If THC can be characterized as a “silver bullet,” then cannabis can be considered a multicomponent “synergistic shotgun” (Izzo et al. 2009; McPartland and
Mediavilla 2001; McPartland and Pruitt 1999; McPartland and Russo 2001; Russo 2011; Russo
and Guy 2006; Russo and McPartland 2003). Many constituents in cannabis work by multiple
mechanisms to modulate the therapeutic effects of THC and mitigate its side effects.
Studies on the combinational effects of THC and CBD have become quite nuanced. The effects
of CBD on THC are dose related (Fadda et al. 2004; Vann et al. 2008; Varvel et al. 2006). Timing
may be a factor: Zuardi (2008) proposed that preadministration of CBD potentiated the effects of
THC via a pharmacokinetic mechanism, whereas coadministration of both compounds caused
CBD to antagonize the effects of THC via a pharmacodynamic mechanism.
Williamson (2001) showed that THC reduced muscle spasticity in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis, but was significantly less effective than a cannabis extract containing the same
amount of THC. A cannabis extract lacking THC inhibited epileptiform bursting in brain slices,
more so than a cannabis extract with THC (Whalley et al. 2004). In an in vitro epilepsy model,
the anticonvulsant effects of cannabis extracts were more potent and more rapidly acting than
isolated THC (Wilkinson et al. 2003). In some cancer cell lines, a CBD-rich extract inhibited
cell growth more potently than pure CBD (Ligresti et al. 2006). Calcium levels in cultured neurons and glia were elevated in a synergistic fashion by adding CBD to THC, but whole cannabis
extracts raised calcium levels even more than pure CBD + THC (Ryan et al. 2006). Cannabis
extracts provided better antinociceptive efficacy in rats than CBD given alone (Comelli et al.
2008). Cannabis extracts were more potent than pure cannabinoids at the receptors TRPV1,
TRPA1, TRPM8 and at inhibiting the enzymes FAAH, DAGLα, and MAGL (De Petrocellis
et al. 2011).
As can be seen in Table 15.1, interest in terpenoids still lags. King et al. (2009) demonstrated
that pristimerin and euphol inhibit MAGL activity, although these terpenoids do not occur in
cannabis. β-caryophyllene has become a focus of attention. It is a component of Sativex® (Guy
and Stott 2005), and is the primary sesquiterpenoid in black pepper, Piper nigrum. It acts as a full

Non-Phytocannabinoid Constituents of Cannabis and Herbal Synergy

agonist at CB2 with strong potency (100 nM), the first proven active phytocannabinoid beyond
Cannabis (Gertsch et al. 2008).
Anonymous (2006) reported interactions between individual terpenoids and THC, apparently
based on human bioassays. Drug interactions were assessed with a neuropsychological questionnaire, the Drug Reaction Scale. Limonene added to THC made the drug sensation more “cerebral and euphoric,” whereas myrcene made the drug sensation more “physical, mellow, sleepy.”
Anonymous alleged that THC plus limonene and THC plus myrcene produced stronger cannabimimetic effects than THC alone.
Research in herbal synergy has elicited a predictable reaction—attempts to disprove it. Some
scientists have contended that synthetic THC (which is legally available) accounts for all the
effects of cannabis. Wachtel et al. (2002) observed no differences in human subjects ingesting or
smoking THC versus herbal cannabis. Hart et al. (2002) reported that human subjects experienced “negative” subjective effects after smoking marijuana but not after oral THC consumption.
Varvel et al. (2005) reported that THC accounts for all effects in mice subjected to the tetrad test.
Ilan et al. (2005) compared the effects of cannabis with high or low CBD and CBC and found
no differences in subjective reports and neurophysiological measures. The Wachtel study used
cannabis with only 0.05% CBD, likely too low to modulate THC (Russo and McPartland 2003).
The other studies share the same problem. Bloor et al. (2008) showed that black market cannabis
contains 4.3–8.5 times more terpenoids than cannabis used in NIDA research.
The isobologram has been rediscovered by twenty-first-century cannabinoid researchers:
Cichewicz and McCarthy (2003) demonstrated antinociceptive synergy between THC and opioids after oral administration in mice. Cox et al. (2007) showed synergy between THC and morphine in the arthritic rat. DeLong et al. (2010) found an additive effect when combining THC
and cannabichromene in mice with LPS-induced inflammation. Four isobolographic studies of
endocannabinoids (e.g., anandamide and N-arachidonoyl-dopamine) or drugs that block their
breakdown (e.g., FAAH inhibitors) also show synergy with analgesics (Farkas et al. 2011; Guindon
et al. 2006; Naidu et al., 2009; Sasso et al. 2012). Nearly a dozen isobolographic studies have also
demonstrated synergy between synthetic cannabinoids, such as CP55,940 or WIN55,212-2, and
a wide range of analgesics, anesthetics, and anticonvulsants, which is beyond the scope of this
review on natural constituents.

15.7 Conclusion
Evolution (i.e., natural selection) over millions of years creates a phytochemical matrix around
key constituents, so they can reach their biochemical targets. Many of our crop plants and medicinal plants exhibit this phenomenon (Spelman 2009). Cannabis is no exception. It has likely
undergone two rounds of coevolution with animals: perhaps 30 million years of selection to fit
mammalian herbivore physiology, followed by thousands of years of accelerated evolution by
humans who selected plants for optimal benefit and minimal toxicity (McPartland and Guy
2004). Ehrlich’s reductionist “silver bullet” philosophy is being replaced by Loewe’s synergistic
concepts (Borisy et al. 2003).
The data herein presented strongly support the therapeutic rationale for combining THC
with other constituents present in cannabis. The impact of individual terpenoids upon THC
requires further animal studies and clinical trials. The formal investigation of the effects of individual flavonoids and other constituents has not yet begun. Should positive outcomes result from
such studies, phytopharmaceutical development may follow. Breeding work has already resulted
in Cannabis chemotypes that produce 97% of monoterpenoid content as myrcene, or 77% as

289

290

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

limonene (E. de Meijer, personal communication, 2010). A better future via cannabis phytochemistry may be an achievable goal through further research of the entourage effect in this versatile
plant that may help it fulfill its promise as a pharmacological treasure trove.

Conflict of interest statement
JM has been a consultant for GW Pharmaceuticals, and has received travel expenses and research
support. ER is Group Senior Medical Advisor to GW Pharmaceuticals and serves as a full-time
consultant.

References
Agrawal, A.K., Kumar, P., Gulati, A., and Seth, P.K. (1989). Cannabis-induced neurotoxicity in
mice: effects on cholinergic (muscarinic) receptors and blood brain barrier permeability. Research
Communications in Substance Abuse, 10, 155–168.
Anonymous. (2006). Studying the effects of terpenes. O’Shaughnessy’s, Spring, 2.
Bensky, D., Gamble, A., and Kaptchuk, T. (1993). Chinese Herbal Medicine: Materia Medica. Seattle, WA:
Eastland Press.
Bloor, R.N., Wang, T.S., Spanel, P., and Smith, D. (2008). Ammonia release from heated ‘street’ cannabis
leaf and its potential toxic effects on cannabis users. Addiction, 103, 1671–1677.
Bohlig, J.F. (1840). Cannabis sativa und Urtica dioica chemisch analysiert. Jahrbuch für praktische
Pharmacie und verwandte Fächer, 3, 1–58.
Borisy, A.A., Elliott, P.J., Hurst, N.W., et al. (2003). Systematic discovery of multicomponent therapeutics.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 100, 7977–7982.
Bornheim, L.M. and Grillo, M.P. (1998). Characterization of cytochrome P450 3A inactivation by cannabidiol: possible involvement of cannabidiol-hydroxyquinone as a P450 inactivator. Chemical Research in
Toxicology, 11, 1209–1216.
Bornheim, L.M., Kim, K.Y., Li, J., Perotti, B.Y., and Benet, L.Z. (1995). Effect of cannabidiol pretreatment
on the kinetics of tetrahydrocannabinol metabolites in mouse brain. Drug Metabolism & Disposition, 23,
825–831.
Buchholz, C.F. (1806). Beiträge zur pflanzenchemie. Analyse des hanfsamens. Neues allgemeines Journal
der Chemie, 6, 615–630.
Buchholz, C.F. (1816). Chemische Untersuchung der trockenen reifen spanischen Pfeffers. Almanach oder
Taschenbuch für Scheidekünstler und Apotheker, 37, 1–30.
Bureau of Narcotics. (1938). Marihuana conference held December 5 1938 in the United States Bureau of
Internal Revenue Building (Room 3003). Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. Available at:
http://www.globalhemp.com/1938/12/marihuana-conference.html.
Burstein, S., Taylor, P., El-Feraly, F.S., and Turner, C. (1976). Prostaglandins and Cannabis—V.
Identification of p-vinylphenol as a potent inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis. Biochemical
Pharmacology, 25, 2003–2004.
Burstein, S., Varanelli, C., and Slade, L.T. (1975). Prostaglandins and Cannabis—III. Inhibition of biosynthesis by essential oil components of marihuana. Biochemical Pharmacology, 24, 1053–1054.
Cichewicz, D.L. and McCarthy, E.A. (2003). Antinociceptive synergy between delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol
and opioids after oral administration. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 304,
1010–1015.
Calkins, A. (1871). Opium and the Opium-Appetite: with Notices of Alcoholic Beverages, Cannabis Indica,
Tobacco and Coca, and Tea and Coffee, in Their Hygienic Aspects and Pathologic Relationships.
Philadelphia, PA: J.B. Lippincott.
Carlini, E.A., Karniol, I.G., Renault, P.F., and Schuster, C.R. (1974). Effects of marihuana in laboratory
animals and man. British Journal of Pharmacology, 50, 299–309.

Non-Phytocannabinoid Constituents of Cannabis and Herbal Synergy

Christison, A. (1850). On Cannabis indica, Indian Hemp. Transactions and Proceedings of the Botanical
Society of Edinburgh, 4, 59–69.
Comelli, F., Giagnoni, G., Bettoni, I., Colleoni, M., and Costa, B. (2008). Antihyperalgesic effect of
a Cannabis sativa extract in a rat model of neuropathic pain: mechanisms involved. Phytotherapy
Research, 22(8), 1017–1024.
Cox, M.L., Haller, V.L., and Welch, S.P. (2007). Synergy between delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol and morphine in the arthritic rat. European Journal of Pharmacology, 567, 125–130.
de Courtive, M.E. (1848). Hashisch. Étude Historique, Chimique et Physiologique. Paris: Edouard Bautruche.
DeLong, G.T., Wolf, C.E., Poklis, A., and Lichtman, A.H. (2010). Pharmacological evaluation of the natural constituent of Cannabis sativa, cannabichromene and its modulation by Δ(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol.
Drug Alcohol Dependence, 112(1–2), 126–133.
De Petrocellis, L., Ligresti, A., Moriello, A.S., et al. (2011). Effects of cannabinoids and cannabinoidenriched Cannabis extracts on TRP channels and endocannabinoid metabolic enzymes. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 163, 1479–1494.
Di Marzo, V., De Petrocellis, L., Fezza, F., Ligresti, A., and Bisogno, T. (2002). Anandamide receptors.
Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes, and Essential Fatty Acids, 66, 377–391.
Dutt, S. (1957). Indian Cannabis sativa and essential oils derived from the same. Indian Soap Journal, 22,
242–246.
Evans, A.T., Formukong, E.A., and Evans, F.J. (1987). Actions of cannabis constituents on enyzmes of arachidonate: anti-inflammatory potential. Biochemical Pharmacology, 36(12), 2035–2037.
Fairbairn, J.W. and Pickens, J.T. (1981). Activity of Cannabis in relation to its ∆-tetrahydrocannabinol
content. British Journal of Pharmacology, 72, 401–409.
Fadda, P., Robinson, L., Fratta, W., Pertwee, R.G., and Riedel, G. (2004). Differential effects of THC- or
CBD-rich cannabis extacts on working memory in rats. Neuropharmacology, 47, 1170–1179.
Farkas, I., Tuboly, G., Benedek, G., and Horvath, G. (2011). The antinociceptive potency of
N-arachidonoyl-dopamine (NADA) and its interaction with endomorphin-1 at the spinal level.
Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behaviour, 99(4), 731–737.
Fischedick, J., Van Der Kooy, F., and Verpoort, R. (2010b). Cannabinoid receptor 1 binding activity and quantitative analysis of Cannabis sativa L. smoke and vapor. Chemical & Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 58(2), 201–207.
Fischedick, J.T., Hazekamp. A., Erkelens, T., Choi, Y.H., and Verpoorte, R. (2010a). Metabolic fingerprinting of Cannabis sativa L., cannabinoids and terpenoids for chemotaxonomic and drug standardization purposes. Phytochemistry, 71, 2058–2073.
Formukong, E.A., Evans, A.T., and Evans, F.J. (1988). Inhibition of the cataleptic effect of tetrahydrocannabinol by other constituents of Cannabis sativa L. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 40, 132–134.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964). Isolation, structure, and partial synthesis of an active constituent of
hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86, 1646–1647.
Gertsch, J., Leonti, M., Raduner, S., et al. (2008). Beta-caryophyllene is a dietary cannabinoid. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105(26), 9099–9104.
Gill, E.W., Paton, W.D.M., and Pertwee, R.G. (1970). Preliminary experiments on the chemistry and pharmacology of Cannabis. Nature, 228, 134–136.
Guindon, J., De Léan, A., and Beaulieu, P. (2006). Local interactions between anandamide, an endocannabinoid, and ibuprofen, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, in acute and inflammatory pain. Pain,
121, 85–93.
Guy, G.W. and Stott, C.G. The development of Sativex—a natural cannabis-based medicine. In: R.
Mechoulam (ed.). Cannabinoids As Therapeutics. Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag, pp. 231–263.
Hall, B.P. (2008). Structure Activity Relationships for Intracellular Loop 2 of the 5HT1a Serotonin Receptor.
Doctoral thesis, Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Montana,
Missoula, MT.

291

292

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Hamilton, E. (1852). Flora Homœopathica, Vol. 1. London: H. Bailliere.
Hanuš, L. (2008). Pharmacological and therapeutic secrets of plant and brain (endo)cannabinoids.
Medicinal Research Reviews, 29, 213–271.
Hart, C.L., Ward, A.S., Haney, M., Comer, S.D., Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M.W. (2002). Comparison
of smoked marijuana and oral Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol in humans. Psychopharmacology, 164(4),
407–415.
Hendricks, H., Malingré, T.M., Batterman, S., and Bos, R. (1978). The essential oil of Cannabis sativa.
Pharmaceutisch Weekblad, 113, 413–424.
Hillig, K.W. (2004). A chemotaxonomic analysis of terpenoid variation in Cannabis. Biochemical
Systematics and Ecology, 32, 875–891.
Hood, L.V.S., Dames, M.E., and Barry, G.T. (1973). Headspace volatiles of marijuana. Nature, 242,
402–403.
Hooper, D. (1908). Charas of Indian hemp. Year-Book of Pharmacy, 1908, 435–444.
Howlett, A.C., Scott, D.K., and Wilken, G.H. (1989). Regulation of adenylate cyclase by cannabinoid
drugs. Insights based on thermodynamic studies. Biochemical Pharmacology, 38(19), 3297–3304.
Huxtable, R.J. and Schwarz, S.K.W. ( 2001). The isolation of morphine—first principles in science and ethics. Molecular Interventions, 1(4), 189–191.
Ilan, A.B., Gevins, A., Coleman, M., ElSohly, M.A., and de Wit, H. (2005). Neurophysiological and subjective proﬁle of marijuana with varying concentrations of cannabinoids. Behavioural Pharmacology, 16,
487–496.
Izzo, A.A., Borrell, i F., Capasso, R., Di Marzo, V., and Mechoulam, R. (2009). Non-psychotropic plant
cannabinoids: new therapeutic opportunities from an ancient herb. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences,
30(10), 515–527.
King, A.R., Dotsey, E.Y., Lodola, A., et al. (2009). Discovery of potent and reversible monoacylglycerol
lipase inhibitors. Chemistry & Biology, 16, 1045–1052.
Kubena, R.K. and Barry, H. (1972). Stimulus characteristics of marihuana components. Nature, 235,
397–398.
Lee, S.Y., Oh, S.M., Lee, S.K., and Chung, K.H. (2005). Antiestrogenic effects of marijuana smoke condensate and cannabinoid compounds. Archives of Pharmacal Research, 28(12), 1365–1375.
Leweke, F. M., Piomelli, D., Pahlisch, F. et al. (2012). Cannabidiol enhances anandamide signaling and
alleviates psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. Translational Psychiatry, 2, e94.
Ligresti, A., Moriello, A.S., Starowicz, K., et al. (2006). Antitumor activity of plant cannabinoids with
emphasis on the effect of cannabidiol on human breast carcinoma. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 318(3), 1375–1387.
Loewe, S. (1928). Die quantitative Problem der Pharmakologie. Ergebnisse der Physiologie, 27, 47–187.
Loewe, S. (1940). Synergism of cannabis and butyl-bromallyl-barbituric acid. Journal of the American
Pharmaceutical Association (Scientific edition), 29, 162–163.
Loewe, S. (1944). Studies on the pharmacology of marihuana. In: LaGuardia Committee (eds.). The
Marihuana Problem in the City of New York. Lancaster, PA: Jaques Cattell Press, pp. 149–212.
Loewe, S. (1945). Marihuana activity of cannabinol. Science, 102, 615–616.
Loewe, S. (1946). Studies on the pharmacology and acute toxicity of compounds with marihuana activity.
Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 88, 154–164.
Ludlow, F.-H. (1857). The Hasheesh Eater: Being Passages Form the Life of A Pythagorean. New York:
Harper.
Martin, L., Morison Smith, D., and Farmilo, C.G. (1961). Essential oil from fresh Cannabis sativa and its
use in identification. Nature 191, 774–776.
McPartland, J.M., Blanchon, D., and Musty, R.E. (2008). Cannabimimetic effects modulated by cholinergic compounds. Addiction Biology, 13, 411–415.

Non-Phytocannabinoid Constituents of Cannabis and Herbal Synergy

McPartland, J.M. and Mediavilla, V. (2001). Non-cannabinoids in cannabis. In: F. Grotenhermen and E.B.
Russo (eds.). Cannabis and Cannabinoids. Binghamton, NY: Haworth Press, pp. 401–409.
McPartland, J.M. and Pruitt, P.L. (1998). An herbal “synergistic shotgun” compared to a synthetic “silver bullet”: medical marijuana versus tetrahydrocannabinol. Proceedings 1998 Symposium on the
Cannabinoids. Burlington, VT: International Cannabinoid Research Society, p. 112.
McPartland, J.M. and Pruitt, P.L. (1999). Side effects of pharmaceuticals not elicited by comparable
herbal medicines: the case of tetrahydrocannabinol and marijuana. Alternative Therapies in Health and
Medicine 5, 57–62.
McPartland, J.M. and Russo, E.B. (2001). Cannabis and cannabis extracts: greater than the sum of their
parts? Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics 1(3–4), 103–132.
Mechoulam, R. (1973). Cannabinoid chemisty. In: R. Mechoulam (ed.). Marijuana. New York: Academic
Press, pp. 1–87.
Mechoulam, R., Ben-Zvi, Z., Shani, A., Zemler, H., and Levy, S. (1972). Cannabinoids and cannabis activity. In: W.D.M. Paton and J. Crown (eds.). Cannabis and its Derivatives. London: Oxford University
Press, pp. 1–13.
Mediavilla, V. and Steinemann, S. (1997). Essential oil of Cannabis sativa L. strains. Journal of the
International Hemp Association, 4(2), 82–84.
Meier, C. and Mediavilla, V. (1998). Factors influencing the yield and the quality of hemp (Cannabis sativa
L.) essential oil. Journal of the International Hemp Association, 5(1), 16–20.
Morgan, C.J. and Curran, H.V. (2008). Effects of cannabidiol on schizophrenia-like symptoms in people
who use cannabis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 306–307.
Naidu, P.S., Booker, L., Cravatt, B.F., and Lichtman, A.H. (2009). Synergy between enzyme inhibitors of
fatty acid amide hydrolase and cyclooxygenase in visceral nociception. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 329, 48–56.
Nigam, M.C., Handa, K.L., Nigam, I.C., and Levi, L. (1965). Essential oils and their constituents. XXIX.
The essential oil of marihuana: composition of the genuine Indian Cannabis sativa L. Canadian Journal
of Chemistry, 43, 3372–3376.
Nissen, L., Zatta, A., Stefanini, I., et al. (2010). Characterization and antimicrobial activity of essential oils
of industrial hemp varieties (Cannabis sativa L.). Fitoterapia, 81, 413–419.
O’Shaughnessy, W.B. (1838–1840). On the preparations of the Indian hemp, or gunjah (Cannabis indica);
Their effects on the animal system in health, and their utility in the treatment of tetanus and other convulsive diseases. Transactions of the Medical and Physical Society of Bengal, 71–102, 421–461.
Paton, W.D.M. and Pertwee, R.G. (1972). Effect of cannabis and certain of its constituents on pentobarbitone sleeping time and phenazone metabolism. British Journal of Pharmacology, 44(2), 250–261.
Polli, G. (1865). Sull’antidoto dell’haschisch. Annali di Chimica Applicata alla Medicina, 40(3), 343–345.
Potter, D. (2009). The Propagation, Characterisation and Optimisation of Cannabis sativa L. as a
Phytopharmaceutical. Doctoral thesis, London: King’s College.
Potter, D.J., Clark, P., and Brown, M.B. (2008). Potency of delta 9-THC and other cannabinoids in cannabis in
England in 2005: implications for psychoactivity and pharmacology. Journal of Forensic Science, 53, 90–94.
Prain, D. (1893). Report on the Cultivation and Use of Gánjá. Calcutta: Bengal Secretariat Press.
Rector, J.M. (1922). Synergistic analgesia: clinical observations. American Journal of Surgery, 36(10 Suppl.),
114–119.
Robiquet, E. (1857). Rapport sur le concours relatif à l'analyse du chanvre présente au nom de la Société de
Pharmacie. Journal de Pharmacie et de Chimie, (Serie 3) 31, 46–51.
Ross, S.A. and ElSohly, M.A. (1996). The volatile oil composition of fresh and air-dried buds of Cannabis
sativa. Journal of Natural Products, 59, 49–51.
Rottanburg, D., Robins, A.H., Ben-Arie, O., Teggin, A., and Elk, R. (1982). Cannabis-associated psychosis
with hypomanic features Lancet, ii, 1364–1366.

293

294

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Russo, E.B. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinid-terpeoid entourage
effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1344–1364.
Russo, E.B. and Guy, G.W. (2006). A tale of two cannabinoids: the therapeutic rationale for combining tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol. Medical Hypotheses, 66, 234–246.
Russo, E., Macarah, C.M., Todd, C.L., Medora, R.S., and Parker, K.K. (2000). Pharmacology of the essential oil of hemp at 5-HT1a and 5-HT2a receptors. Abstract at the 41st Annual Meeting of the American
Society of Pharmacognosy, July 22–26, Seattle, WA.
Russo, E.B. and McPartland, J.M. (2003). Cannabis is more than simply delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol.
Psychopharmacology, 165, 431–432.
Ryan, D., Drysdale, A.J., Pertwee, R.G., and Platt B. (2006). Differential effects of cannabis extracts and
pure plant cannabinoids on hippocampal neurones and glia. Neuroscience Letters, 408(3), 236–241.
Sasso, O., Bertorelli, R., Bandiera, T., et al. (2012). Peripheral FAAH inhibition causes profound antinociception and protects against indomethacin-induced gastric lesions. Pharmacological Research, 65,
553–563.
Sauer, M.A., Rifka, S.M., Hawks, R.L., Cutler, G.B., and Loriaux, D.L. (1983). Marijuana: interaction with
the estrogen receptor. Journal of Pharmacy and Experimental Therapeutics, 224, 404–407.
Schaeffer, J. (1975). The significance of marihuana in a small agricultural community in Jamaica. In V.
Rubin (ed.). Cannabis and Culture. The Hague: Mouton, pp. 355–388.
Schlesinger, S. (1840). Untersuchung der Cannabis sativa. Buchner’s Repertorium für die Pharmacie, 21,
190–208.
Schurr, A. and Livne, A. (1976). Differential inhibition of mitochondrial monoamine oxidase from brain
by hashish compounds. Biochemical Pharmacology, 25, 1201–1203.
Segelman, A.B., Sofia, R.D., Segelman, F.P., Harakal, J.J., and Knobloch, L.C. (1974). Cannabis sativa
L. (marijuana) V: pharmacological evaluation of marijuana aqueous extract and volatile oil. Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 63, 962–964.
Shanavaskhan, A.E., Binu, S., Muraleedharan-Unnithan, C., Santhoshkumar, E.S., and Pushpangadan,
P. (1997). Detoxification techniques of traditional physicians of Kerala, India on some toxic herbal
drugs. Fitoterapia, 68, 69–74.
Simonsen, J.L. and Todd, A.R. (1942). Cannabis indica, Part X. The essential oil from Egyptian hashish.
Journal of the Chemical Society (London), 1942(1), 188–191.
Smith, T. and Smith, H. (1847a). On the resin of Indian hemp. Pharmaceutical Journal, 6, 127–128.
Smith, T. and Smith, H. (1847b). Process for preparing cannabine, or hemp resin. Pharmaceutical Journal,
6, 171–173.
Spelman, K., Wetschler, M.H., and Cech, N.B. (2009). Comparison of alkylamide yield in ethanolic
extracts prepared from fresh versus dry Echinacea purpurea utilizing HPLC-ESI-MS. Journal of
Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis, 49, 1141–1149.
Spronck, H.J., Luteijn, J.M., Salemink, C.A., and Nugteren, D.H. (1978). Inhibition of prostaglandin biosynthesis by derivatives of olivetol formed under pyrolysis of cannabidiol. Biochemical Pharmacology,
27, 607–608.
Stahl, E. and Kunde, R. (1973). Die Leitsubstanzen der Haschisch-Suchhunde. Kriminalistik, 9, 385–388.
Tashkin, D.P., Reiss, S., Shapiro, B.J., Calvarese, B., Olsen, J.L., and Lodge, W. (1977). Bronchial effects of
aerosolized Δ 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in healthy and asthmatic subjects. American Review of Respiratory
Disease, 115, 57–65.
Taylor, B. (1855). The Lands of the Saracens. New York: G.P. Putnam & Sons.
Truitt, E.B., Kinzer, G.W., and Berlow, J.M. (1976). Behavioral activity in various fractions of marijuana
smoke condensate in the rat. In: M.C. Braude and S. Szara (eds.). Pharmacology of Marihuana. Vol. 2.
New York: Raven Press, pp. 463–474.
Tscheppe, F. (Schübler G, präside). (1821). Chemische Untersuchung der Hanfblätter. Dissertation,
Tübingen.

Non-Phytocannabinoid Constituents of Cannabis and Herbal Synergy

Turner, C.E., ElSohly, M.A., and Boeren, E.G. (1980). Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. XVII. A review of
the natural constituents. Journal of Natural Products, 43, 169–234.
Valente, L. (1880). Sull’ essenza di canapa. Gazzetta chimica italiana, 10, 479–481.
Valente, L. (1881). Sull’ idrocarburo estratto dalla canapa. Gazzetta chimica italiana, 11, 196–198.
Valieri, R. (1887). Sulla canapa nostrana e suoi preparati in sostituzione della Cannabis indica. Naples:
Stabilimento tipografico dell’unione.
Vann, R.E., Gamage, T.F., Warner, J.A., et al. (2008). Divergent effects of cannabidiol on the discriminative stimulus and place conditioning effects of delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 94(1–3), 191–198.
Varvel, S.A., Bridgen, D.T., Tao, Q., Thomas, B.F., Martin, B.R., and Lichtman, A.H. (2005). Delta-9tetrahydrocannbinol accounts for the antinociceptive, hypothermic, and cataleptic effects of marijuana
in mice. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 314, 329–337.
Varvel, S.A., Wiley, J.L., Yang, R., et al. (2006). Interactions between THC and cannabidiol in mouse models of cannabinoid activity. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 186(2), 226–234.
Wachtel, S.R., ElSohly, M.A., Ross, R.A., Ambre, J., and de Wit, H. (2002). Comparison of the subjective
effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and marijuana in humans. Psychopharmacology, 161, 331–339.
Wagner, H. (2004). Natural products chemistry and phytomedicine research in the new millennium: new
developments and challenges. ARKIVOC Journal of Organic Chemistry, 7, 277–284.
Weil, A.T. (1970). Adverse reactions to marihuana, classification and suggested treatment. New England
Journal of Medicine, 282, 997–1000.
Whalley, B.J., Wilkinson, J.D., Williamson, E.M., and Constanti, A. (2004). A novel component of cannabis extract potentiates excitatory synaptic transmission in rat olfactory cortex in vitro. Neuroscience
Letters, 365(1), 58–63.
Wilkinson, J.D, Whalley, B.J., Baker, D., et al. (2003). Medicinal cannabis: is delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol
necessary for all its effects? Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics, 55, 1687–1694.
Williamson, E.M. (2001). Synergy and other interactions in phytomedicines. Phytomedicine, 8, 401–409.
Wood, T.B., Spivey, W.T.N., and Easterfield, T.H. (1896). Charas, the resin of Indian hemp. Journal of the
Chemical Society, 6, 539–546.
Zuardi, A.W. (2008). Cannabidiol: from an inactive cannabinoid to a drug with wide spectrum of action.
Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria, 30, 271–280.

295

Chapter 16

Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics
and Disposition in Alternative Matrices
Marilyn A. Huestis and Michael L. Smith

16.1 Introduction
There is growing interest in the pharmacology and toxicology of natural and synthetic cannabinoids and in cannabinoid pharmacotherapy development. This chapter focuses on human
phytocannabinoid pharmacokinetics and interpretation of cannabinoid blood, plasma, oral fluid
(OF), sweat, urine, and hair tests. The endogenous cannabinoid system plays a critical role in
physiological and behavioral processes. Endogenous cannabinoid neurotransmitters, receptors,
and transporters, synthetic cannabinoid agonists and antagonists, and cannabis-based extracts are
investigated to identify novel approaches to treat human disorders. Cannabis is one of the oldest
and most commonly taken drugs. Knowledge of cannabinoid pharmacokinetics and cannabinoid
disposition into biological fluids and tissues is essential to understanding the onset, magnitude
and duration of cannabinoid pharmacodynamic effects.
Pharmacokinetics encompasses cannabinoid absorption following diverse routes of administration, distribution throughout the body, metabolism by tissues and organs, elimination in
the feces, urine, sweat, OF, and hair, and how these processes change over time. Cannabis plants
contain more than 100 cannabinoids including the primary psychoactive component delta-9-­
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid that decarboxylates with
heat producing THC. THC may degrade when exposed to air, heat, or light, and acid exposure
can oxidize THC to cannabinol (CBN) that is approximately 10% as potent. THC, containing no
nitrogen but with two chiral centers in trans-configuration, is described here by the dibenzopyran
or delta 9 system.

16.2 THC pharmacokinetics
16.2.1 Absorption
16.2.1.1 Smoked administration

Smoking, the principal cannabis administration route, provides rapid and efficient drug delivery
from lungs to brain, contributing to its abuse potential. Intense pleasurable and strongly reinforcing effects are due to immediate central nervous system drug exposure. Early investigations had
analytical limitations, but characterized important aspects of smoked cannabis administration.
The most important findings from these studies, described in more detail in an earlier review
(Huestis 2005), are summarized here.

Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics and Disposition in Alternative Matrices

180

THC
11-OH-THC

Micrograms /L

150

THCCOOH
Inhale

120

n=6

90
60
30
0

−2

2

6

10
14
Minutes

18

22

Fig. 16.1 Mean (n = 6) plasma concentrations of ∆9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC, ●, 11-hydroxy-∆9tetrahydrocannabinol (11-OH-THC, ■) and 11-nor-9-carboxy-∆9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THCCOOH,
▲) during smoking of a single 3.55% THC cigarette. Each arrow represents one inhalation or puff
on the cannabis cigarette.
Reproduced from Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, 168, p. 660, Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism of the Plant
Cannabinoids, Δ 9-Tetrahydrocannibinol, Cannabidiol and Cannabinol,M. A. Huestis, fig. 1 (c) 2005, Springer Science and
Business Media. With kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media.

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

Bioavailability of smoked THC is approximately 25%, with large intra- and intersubject variability due to many factors including smoking topography.
Smoked THC is rapidly absorbed from the lungs reaching peak plasma concentration (Cmax)
prior to the end of smoking, in about 6–10 min (Fig. 16.1).
Peak plasma THC concentrations are only slightly lower after smoking compared to after
intravenous (i.v.) administration.
After 16 and 30 mg smoked THC doses, respective mean ± SD plasma THC concentrations
are 7.0 ± 8.1 and 18.1 ± 12.0 micrograms/L following one inhalation with mean (range) Cmax
of 84.3 (range 50–129) and 162.2 micrograms/L (76–267).
Mean THC concentrations are approximately 60% and 20% of peak concentrations 15 and 30
min after initiation of smoking, respectively, and within 2 h, at or below 5 micrograms/L.
The smoked route of administration permits a user to titrate his/her dose by adjusting smoking topography or manner in which they smoke.
THC metabolizes to equipotent 11-hydroxy-THC (11-OH-THC) and inactive 11-nor-9-­
carboxy-THC (THCCOOH) metabolites during cannabis smoking.

Schwope et al. (2011a, 2011b) developed the first liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LCMSMS) method to simultaneously measure six free and glucuronidated cannabinoids
in blood and plasma with low detection limits (0.5–5 micrograms/L) and further characterized
cannabinoid profiles following smoking. Ten participants (nine men, one woman) smoked one
6.8% THC cannabis cigarette and THC, 11-OH-THC, THCCOOH, cannabidiol (CBD), CBN,
THC-glucuronide and THCCOOH-glucuronide were simultaneously quantified in blood and
plasma within 24 h of collection (Fig. 16.2). Median whole blood (plasma) maximum concentrations in chronic daily cannabis smokers were 50 (76), 6.4 (10), 41 (67), 1.3 (2.0), 2.4 (3.6), and
89 (190) 0.25 h after smoking initiation for THC, 11-OH-THC, THCCOOH, CBD, CBN, and

297

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Whole blood

II-OH-THC

THC

100
75
50
25
0
15

CBD

6

8

15
5

0

0

2

4

6

8

0
3

2

2

1

1

0
Micrograms/L
CBN

4

5

6

0

2

4

6

8

0
6

4

4

2

2

0

THC-gluc

Reproduced from David M. Schwope,
Erin L. Karschner, David A. Gorelick,
and Marilyn A. Huestis, Identification
of Recent Cannabis Use: Whole-Blood
and Plasma Free and Glucuronidated
Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics following Controlled Smoked Cannabis
Administration, Clinical Chemistry,
57 (10), pp. 1406–1414 (c) 2011,
American Association for Clinical
Chemistry, with permission. doi:
10.1373/clinchem.2011.171777.

2

10

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

THCCOOH

Fig. 16.2 Median (interquartile range) blood and plasma
concentrations following smoking of a 6.8% THC cannabis
cigarette. Samples collected
at 0.5, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0,
3.0, 4.0, 6.0, and 22 h after
starting smoking. Dotted lines
indicate limits of quantification: 1 microgram/L for THC;
11-OH-THC; THCCOOH; CBD;
and CBN; 0.5 micrograms/L
for THC-glucuronide; and 5
micrograms/L for THCCOOHglucuronide.

0

100
75
50
25
0

10

3

100
75
50
25
0

THCCOOH-gluc

298

300

0

2

4

6

8

0

2

4

6

8

0

4

8 12 16 20

0
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
100
75
50
25
0

4

6

8

0

2

4

6

8

0

2

4

6

8

0

2

4

6

8

0

2

4

6

8

8 12 16 20

0
8 12 16 20
0
Hours

4

8 12 16 20

200
100
4

2

4

100
0

0

0

300

200
0

Plasma

THCCOOH-glucuronide. At 0.5 h median THC-glucuronide blood (plasma) concentration was
0.7 (1.4) micrograms/L. At observed Cmax, whole-blood (plasma) detection rates were 60% (80%),
80% (90%), and 50% (80%) for CBD, CBN, and THC-glucuronide, respectively. CBD and CBN
were not found after 1 h in either matrix at a limit of quantification (LOQ) = 1.0 micrograms/L.
The authors proposed that detection of CBD and CBN identifies recent intake.
More efficient THC delivery systems are being investigated. Van de Kooy et al. (2009) reported
that mixing tobacco with cannabis increased volatility. Of course, the harmful side effects of
tobacco smoking preclude employing this method for clinical treatment. The Volcano Vaporizer
System (Storz & Bickel GmbH & Co., Tuttlingen, Germany) offers a more efficient delivery system

Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics and Disposition in Alternative Matrices

reducing side stream smoke losses, and also reducing harmful by-products that do not volatilize at
the lower temperatures utilized for cannabinoid vaporization (Pomahacova et al. 2009).
16.2.1.2 Oral administration

There are fewer THC and THC metabolite disposition data after oral administration. Studies of
absorption following orally ingested THC are important since the licensed synthetic THC (dronabinol) medicine is taken orally and also because abuse by the oral route is common. THC is readily absorbed due to its high octanol/water coefficient, estimated at 6000 to 9 million. Absorption is
slower when cannabinoids are ingested, with lower, delayed peak concentrations (Karschner et al.
2011a; Schwilke et al. 2009). Dose, route of administration, vehicle, and physiological factors such
as absorption and metabolism and excretion rates influence drug concentrations. Early studies of
oral THC bioavailability compared this route of administration to smoking (Huestis 2005). Some
important characteristics are:
◆

Bioavailability is lower after oral ingestion compared to smoking, about 6%.

◆

Administering THC in sesame oil improves bioavailability.

◆

Time to plasma THC Cmax after oral ingestion is about 2–6 h compared to minutes after smoking.

◆

Two peak THC concentrations after ingestion are possible due to enterohepatic recirculation.

◆

◆

After a 20 mg dose in food (chocolate cookie) peak plasma THC concentrations are 4.4–11
micrograms/L 1–5 h after ingestion.
Similar concentrations occur after 10 mg Marinol® (dronabinol).

Investigations after 2005 further characterized oral ingestion of THC. In a randomized, double-­
blind, within-subject, inpatient study of multiple 14.8 mg THC in hemp oil or 7.5 mg dronabinol
doses, plasma THC and 11-OH-THC never exceeded 6.1 micrograms/L (Goodwin et al. 2006).
Cannabinoids were always less than 0.5 micrograms/L 15.5 h after the last dose. THCCOOH
concentrations exceeded 1.0 micrograms/L 1.5 h following the first dronabinol and 4.5 h after
the first 14.8 mg hemp oil doses. THCCOOH peaked as high as 43 micrograms/L and always was
1.0 micrograms/L or less 39.5 h after the last dose. Cannabinoid concentrations were similar for
7.5 mg dronabinol and 14.8 mg hemp oil, demonstrating ­vehicle effect on absorption.
Schwilke et al. (2009) quantified free and conjugated cannabinoid plasma concentrations after
multiple 20 mg oral THC doses to chronic daily cannabis smokers residing on a closed research
unit. Twenty mg THC was administered every 4–8 h in escalating total daily doses (40–120 mg)
for 7 days. Mean ± SE free plasma THC, 11-OH-THC, and THCCOOH concentrations 19.5 h
after admission (before controlled oral THC dosing) were 4.3 ± 1.1, 1.3 ± 0.5, and 34.0 ± 8.4
micrograms/L, respectively. During oral dosing, free 11-OH-THC and THCCOOH increased
steadily, whereas THC did not. Mean ± SE peak plasma free THC, 11-OH-THC, and THCCOOH
22.5 h after the last dose were 3.8 ± 0.5, 3.0 ± 0.7, and 196.9 ± 39.9 micrograms/L, respectively.
Plasma THC concentrations remained greater than 1 microgram/L for at least 1 day after daily
cannabis smoking and also after cessation of multiple oral THC doses. The authors commented
that plasma THC concentrations greater than 1 microgram/L are often cited as evidence of recent
cannabis intake but this may not be true following chronic frequent cannabis smoking or ingestion.
16.2.1.3 Rectal administration

THC-hemisuccinate had the highest (13.5%) THC bioavailability in monkeys among different suppository formulations maximizing bioavailability and reducing first-pass hepatic THC
metabolism (Huestis 2005). Following 10–15 mg oral Marinol® for spasticity, plasma THC

299

300

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

concentrations peaked after 1–8 h at 2.1–16.9 micrograms/L. Rectal 2.5–5 mg THC hemisuccinate suppositories produced maximum 1.1–4.1 micrograms/L plasma concentrations in 2–8 h.
Rectal bioavailability was approximately twice that of the oral route.
16.2.1.4 Sublingual and dermal administration

Cannabis sativa plant extracts containing different cannabinoids with different effects are available or being developed as pharmacotherapies (see section 16.6). These preparations are administered by the sublingual route to reduce toxicity associated with smoked cannabis, and to reduce
first-pass metabolism. Extract efficacy is being evaluated for analgesia, migraine relief, and spasticity among other indications.
Low (5.4 mg THC and 5.0 mg CBD) and high (16.2 mg THC and 15.0 mg CBD) oromucosal
Sativex® (GW Pharma, Salisbury, England) was compared to 5 and 15 mg synthetic oral THC in
a randomized, controlled, double-blind study in nine occasional cannabis smokers (Karschner
et al. 2011a, 2011b). CBD, THC, 11-hydroxy-THC, and THCCOOH were quantified in plasma
by two-dimensional gas chromatography mass spectrometry (2D-GCMS). There were significant
differences (p <0.05) in the plasma THC Cmax and areas under the curve (AUC) from 0–10.5 h
postdose for all analytes between low and high doses for both medications. Similar absorption
occurred with mean ± SE relative bioavailabilities of 92.6 ± 13.1% for 5 and 15 mg oral THC and
98.8 ± 11.0% for low- and high-dose Sativex®, respectively. This study demonstrated similar bioavailabilities for Sativex® and oral THC. In addition, there were no significant differences in THC
effects with or without equivalent CBD and no significant pharmacokinetic interactions between
THC and CBD at the administered doses and 1:1 THC:CBD ratio.
16.2.2 Distribution

THC concentrations decrease rapidly after smoking due to distribution into tissues, hepatic
metabolism, and urinary and fecal excretion. THC is highly lipophilic and rapidly taken up by
highly perfused tissues, such as lung, heart, brain, and liver. It is estimated that 2–22 mg THC
is necessary to produce pharmacological effects in humans (Huestis 2005). Assuming 10–25%
smoked THC bioavailability, 0.2–4.4 mg THC is the required smoked dose, with about 1% or 2–44
micrograms THC in brain at peak concentration. Equilibration between blood and tissue THC
occurred approximately 6 h after an i.v. THC dose. When 200 micrograms/kg intrajugular THC
was administered to pigs, blood terminal half-life was 10.6 h and volume of distribution (Vd) 32
L/kg, much larger than found in humans (Brunet et al. 2006). The authors observed that the pig
had a higher percentage of body fat which may contribute to the larger Vd but believed the model
yielded valuable data to assist in interpretation of human cannabinoid results. THC concentrations 0.5 h after 200 micrograms/kg intrajugular THC were blood 24, kidney 272, heart 178, lung
1888, muscle 55, spleen 34, fat 91, liver 155, brain 49, bile 0.4, and vitreous humor 1.2 micrograms/
kg. THC was eliminated fastest from liver and was unmeasureable after 6 h (<5 micrograms/kg).
THC concentrations decreased more slowly in brain than blood, but at 6 h were only 9% of those
at 0.5 h. Fat had the highest THC retention, with detection beyond 24 h. 11-OH-THC was only
found in liver, and THCCOOH was less than or equal to 5 micrograms/kg in most tissues.
In a study of 25 frequent, long-term cannabis smokers (12 males, 13 females), investigators
found that blood THC concentrations persisted for multiple days after cannabis discontinuation
(Karschner et al. 2009). Blood was collected during 7 days of monitored cannabis abstinence.
Nine subjects (36%) had no measurable THC; 16 had at least one positive THC of at least 0.25
micrograms/L, but not necessarily on the first day. On day 7, six participants still had detectable
THC concentrations (mean ± SD, 0.3 ± 0.7 micrograms/L) and all 25 had measurable THCCOOH

Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics and Disposition in Alternative Matrices

(6.2 ± 8.8 micrograms/L). Five participants, all female, had THC-positive blood specimens over
all 7 days. The authors re-emphasize that THC distributed to lipid stores in chronic cannabis users
can be released into blood over many days.
THC metabolism to 11-OH-THC, THCCOOH, and phase II metabolites also contributes to
THC reduction in blood. When tritiated i.v. THC and 11-OH-THC pharmacodynamics and
pharmacokinetics were compared, equal doses produced equal psychoactive effects, but the onset
of effects and removal from the intravascular compartment was more rapid for 11-OH-THC
(Huestis 2005). The earlier results suggest that 11-OH-THC diffuses into human brain more readily than THC and that plasma protein binding of 11-OH-THC is lower than for THC. Additional
information about THC distribution from earlier studies include:
◆
◆

◆

Steady state Vd is about 3.4 L/kg.
Less highly perfused tissues accumulate THC more slowly and release it over a longer period
of time.
THC stored in fat in chronic frequent cannabis smokers can be released into blood for days.

Because the degree of tolerance development following chronic frequent cannabis administration and the underlying mechanisms for tolerance were unclear, Gorelick et al. (2012) studied
the development of tolerance following around-the-clock (every 3.5–6 h) 20 mg oral synthetic
THC in 13 male daily cannabis smokers: 40 mg day 1; 100 mg days 2–4; and 120 mg days 5–7.
Systolic and diastolic blood pressure, heart rate, and symptoms of subjective intoxication (100
mm visual analogue scales) were assessed on the morning of day 1 (before oral THC), and on
days 2, 4, and 6, every 30 min for 3 h after the first THC dose. Morning subjective intoxication
ratings increased from days 1 to 2, and then declined on days 4 and 6. The morning THC dose
increased intoxication ratings on day 2, but had less effect on days 4 and 6, a pattern consistent
with tolerance. THC lowered blood pressure and increased heart rate over 6 days. Plasma THC
and 11-OH-THC increased significantly over the first 5 dosing days reaching mean Cmax of 30
and 15 micrograms/L on day 5. Six days of around-the-clock, oral THC produced tolerance to
subjective intoxication, but not to cardiovascular effects.
THC rapidly crosses the placenta, although concentrations are lower in fetal blood and tissues than in maternal plasma and tissues (Huestis 2005). THC metabolites, 11-OH-THC and
THCCOOH, cross the placenta much less efficiently, and it is probable that THCCOOH does not
pass from mother to fetus by placental transfer. THC in human umbilical cord blood is three to
six times lower than in maternal blood, with greater transfer to the fetus early in pregnancy. THC
also concentrates into breast milk from maternal plasma due to its high lipophilicity.
16.2.3 Metabolism

THC metabolizes primarily to 11-OH-THC, THCCOOH and glucuronide conjugates. THC
hydroxylation at C9 by hepatic cytochrome P450 2C9, 2C19, and 3A4 enzymes produces the equipotent metabolite, 11-OH-THC, originally thought to be the true psychoactive analyte. More than
100 di- and tri-hydroxy, ketone, aldehyde, and carboxylic acid THC metabolites have been identified. Significant 8β-OH-THC and lower 8α-OH-THC concentrations also have been detected.
Some important facts (Huestis 2005) regarding THC metabolism are:
◆
◆

◆

Plasma concentrations of 11-OH-THC following smoking are about 10% those of THC.
Plasma concentrations of 11-OH-THC after oral ingestion are approximately equal to those of
THC.
THCCOOH-glucuronide is the principal Phase II metabolite.

301

302

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

◆

◆
◆

◆

◆

Plasma THCCOOH concentrations are greater than those of THC 30–45 min after smoking
and 1 h after oral ingestion (dronabinol) for occasional cannabis users.
There is no significant difference in metabolism between men and women.
There is large intra- and intersubject variability in the concentration profile of plasma THC
and metabolites.
THC is primarily metabolized in the liver but additional drug is metabolized in other tissues
including brain, intestine and lung.
After occasional cannabis users smoked 16 and 30 mg THC cigarettes, mean (range) plasma
THCCOOH Cmax were 24.5 micrograms/L (15–54) and 54.0 micrograms/L (22–101), respectively (Huestis et al. 1992).

The previously cited study by Schwope et al. (2011a, 2011b) described blood and plasma concentration time profiles for THC, 11-OH-THC, THCCOOH, CBD, CBN, THC-glucuronide
and THCCOOH-glucuronide following smoking of a 6.8% THC cigarette (Fig. 16.2). This study
demonstrated that within hours THCCOOH-glucuronide, a more water soluble metabolite that
is more readily excreted, is the major metabolite in blood and plasma. THCCOOH-glucuronide
can be detected in blood for many hours, but can dissociate into free THCCOOH, especially when
stored in blood outside the body at room temperature (Skopp and Potsch 2004).
16.2.4 Elimination

Within 5 days, 80–90% of a THC dose is excreted, primarily as hydroxylated and carboxylated
metabolites (Huestis 2005). More than 65% is excreted in feces, with approximately 25% in urine.
Of the many acidic urinary metabolites, THCCOOH glucuronide is primary, while 11-OH-THC
predominates in feces. Some important facts (Huestis 2005) about THC elimination from the
human body include the following:
◆
◆

◆

◆
◆

Elimination half-life for THC is nonlinear with a terminal half-life of about 4.1 days.
Plasma THCCOOH and THCCOOH-glucuronide terminal elimination half-lives in frequent cannabis smokers were, respectively, 5.2 and 6.8 days and 6.2 and 3.7 days in occasional
smokers.
Urinary THCCOOH concentrations drop rapidly until approximately 20–50 micrograms/L,
then are eliminated with a terminal half-life of about 3–4 days.
The percent of a smoked THC dose excreted in urine over 7 days is about 0.54%.
Detection times in urine after smoking a 3.55% THC cigarette with a 15 micrograms/L urine
THCCOOH cutoff concentration is 2–5 days for occasional cannabis smokers but can extend
to weeks in chronic daily cannabis smokers.

There is much less THC elimination data for chronic compared to occasional cannabis smokers. In view of this limitation, Lowe et al. (2009) monitored 33 chronic, daily cannabis smokers
who abstained from drug use and resided on a secure unit under 24 h/day continuous medical
surveillance for up to 30 days. Urine specimens were quantified for total THC, 11-OH-THC,
and THCCOOH (LOQ = 0.25 micrograms/L) after tandem Escherichia coli β-glucuronidase and
alkaline hydrolysis. This method efficiently hydrolyzes ester THCCOOH glucuronide linkages;
enzymatic methods do not completely hydrolyze THCCOOH glucuronides in urine, yielding
only about 50% free drug, while a combination of Escherichia coli β-glururonidase followed by
10N NaOH hydrolysis produced the most effective release of THC, 11-OH-THC and THCCOOH
from their glucuronides (Abraham et al. 2007). Conversion of THC glucuronide to THC in

Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics and Disposition in Alternative Matrices

urine was 90.4% but the tandem hydrolysis method in plasma produced poor chromatography
and could not be utilized (Schwilke et al. 2009). Extended THC and 11-OH-THC excretion
was observed by Lowe et al. (2009); 14 participants had measurable urine THC for at least 24
h after abstinence initiation. Seven of these were THC-positive for more than 3 days, 5 of these
positive for 3–7 days, one for 12 days, and one for 24 days. 11-OH-THC and THCCOOH were
detected in urine from one chronic frequent cannabis smoker for at least 24 days. These data
document long detection windows for THC and 11-OH-THC in urine, as well as THCCOOH
in urine from chronic cannabis smokers. Our new LCMSMS methods circumvent hydrolysis
by directly quantifying THC, 11-OH-THC, THCCOOH, CBD, CBN, THC-glucuronide and
THCCOOH-glucuronide in 1.0 mL whole blood or plasma (Schwope et al. 2011a) and 0.5 mL of
urine (Scheidweiler et al. 2012). These methods should facilitate investigations of the disposition
and identity of urinary cannabinoids.

16.3 Cannabinoids in oral fluid
OF is a suitable specimen for monitoring cannabinoid exposure and has applications in driving
under the influence of drugs (DUID) investigations, drug treatment, workplace, pain management and forensic drug testing, and in clinical trials (Bosker and Huestis 2009). OF is easily and
noninvasively collected, is gender neutral for a directly observed collection reducing adulteration
potential, and basic drugs are present in OF in higher concentrations than in blood due to ion
trapping in the more acidic OF environment. These characteristics provide advantages over blood
and urine testing. Limitations include small sample volume, dry mouth after stimulant intake,
potential contamination from smoking, and the need for high sensitivity analytical instrumentation. The Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) in the US is
currently evaluating OF for federally mandated workplace drug testing (Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration 2011). The European Union Roadside Testing Assessment
(ROSITA) and DRUID studies demonstrated that OF was an acceptable matrix and identified
collection devices that performed well (Houwing et al. 2013; Langel et al. 2008; Steinmeyer et al.
2001); currently, many European countries and Australia routinely utilize OF for DUID testing
(Chu et al. 2012; Verstraete 2005).
Cannabinoid presence in OF primarily derives from THC depots in the mouth created by
THC absorbed from THC-laden cannabis smoke (Huestis 2005). The first OF specimen collected
immediately after smoking contains large amounts of THC (approximately 5800 micrograms/L)
that fell to concentrations near 80 micrograms/L by 0.3 h. Initially, investigators believed that
cannabis smoke was the only source of OF THC because cannabinoid metabolites could not be
identified in studies using radiolabeled-THC or GCMS with an LOQ of 0.5 micrograms/L. As
scientists developed methods for THCCOOH at ng/L detection limits, THCCOOH concentrations were 10–142 ng/L in 21 of 26 OF specimens previously reported THC-positive (Day et al.
2006). In the same year, Moore et al. (2006a, 2006b) validated the Quantisal™ collection device
reporting 80% THCCOOH recovery, and examined 143 OF specimens previously THC-positive.
Ninety-five (66.4%) were positive for THC and THCCOOH, 14 (9.7%) for THCCOOH only,
and 27 (18.8%) for THC only (THC LOQ = 1 micrograms/L; THCCOOH LOQ = 2 ng/L). The
physicochemical properties of THC and THCCOOH result in adherence of these cannabinoids
to collection devices (Huestis et al. 2011). THC recovery from nine collection devices ranged
from 12.5–85.4% (Langel et al. 2008). Addition of elution buffers to collection devices improved
recoveries to greater than 90% in some collectors and stabilized labile OF analytes, potentially
explaining inconsistencies in earlier reports (Bosker and Huestis 2009).

303

304

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

OF collection and analytical procedures improved over time. A series of controlled cannabinoid
administration studies characterized OF cannabinoids pharmcokinetics (Bosker and Huestis
2009; Coulter et al. 2012; Desrosiers et al. 2012; Lee et al. 2012a; Milman et al. 2010). We measured
THC, CBD, CBN, and THCCOOH disposition in ten chronic cannabis smokers’ OF collected
with a Quantisal™ device after each smoked a 6.8% THC cigarette (Lee et al. 2012a). Cannabinoids
were quantified by 2D-GCMS (LOQ = 0.5, 0.5, 1, 0.0075 micrograms/L, respectively). OF samples
(n = 86) were examined 0.5 h before and 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 22 h after smoking initiation.
Before smoking, four and nine participants’ OF samples were positive for THC and THCCOOH,
respectively, but none were CBD or CBN positive. Maximum THC, CBD, and CBN concentrations occurred within 0.5 h, with medians of 644, 30.4, and 49.0 micrograms/L, respectively. All
samples were THC positive at 6 h (2.1–44.4 micrograms/L), and four of six were positive at 22
h. CBD and CBN were positive only up to 6 h in three (0.6–2.1 micrograms/L) and four (1.0–4.4
micrograms/L) participants, respectively. Median OF THCCOOH Cmax was 115 ng/L, with all
samples positive to 6 h (14.8–263 ng/L) and five of six positive at 22 h. By quantifying multiple
cannabinoids and evaluating eight alternative cutoff concentrations, windows of drug detection
were determined, markers of recent smoking suggested, and passive contamination minimized.
Passive contamination of OF may occur when individuals are exposed to cannabis smoke.
Identifying and quantifying THCCOOH in OF would rule out passive contamination, since it is
not present in cannabis smoke. To investigate this issue, OF was collected from ten nonsmokers in
a Dutch coffee shop where others smoked (Moore et al. 2011). THC was positive in all OF specimens collected 3 h after passive exposure to smoke (LOQ = 0.5 micrograms/L), with five subjects’
OF THC exceeding 4 micrograms/L, the current recommended cutoff concentration for immunoassay screening. Seventy percent (70%) of specimens exceeded 2 micrograms/L THC, the recommended confirmation cutoff concentration. No THCCOOH was found at an LOQ = 2 ng/L.
Around-the-clock escalating 20 mg oral THC doses (40–120 mg/day) were administered for 8
days to ten daily cannabis smokers (Milman et al. 2011a, 2011b). Expectorated and Quantisal™
OF samples (n = 440 each) were analyzed by 2D-GCMS with a 7.5 ng/L THCCOOH LOQ and
0.5 micrograms/L for other cannabinoids (Milman et al. 2010). For Quantisal ™ specimens,
THCCOOH was the most prevalent analyte in 432 samples (98.2%), with concentrations up to
1117.9 ng/L. 11-OH-THC was not identified in any sample, while CBD and CBN were in three
and eight samples, respectively, with maximum concentrations of 2.1 and 13 micrograms/L.
THC was present in only 20.7% of samples, with highest concentrations near admission (median 4.2 micrograms/L, range 0.6–481.9), as was true for expectorated OF from previously self-­
administered smoked cannabis. Expectorated specimens gave similar results in specimens
analyzed within 24 h to reduce analyte instability.
OF and plasma THC and THCCOOH concentrations in these chronic daily cannabis smokers
were compared (Fig. 16.3) (Milman et al. 2011a). THC and THCCOOH plasma LOQs were 0.25
micrograms/L, and 0.5 micrograms/L for 11-OH-THC. Despite multiple oral THC administrations each day and increasing plasma THC concentrations, OF THC concentrations generally
decreased over time, reflecting primarily, previously self-administered smoked cannabis. Log
THC concentrations in OF and plasma were not significantly correlated (r = −0.10; P = 0.065). OF
and plasma THCCOOH concentrations, albeit with 1000-fold higher concentrations in plasma,
increased throughout dosing. Log OF and plasma THCCOOH concentrations were significantly
correlated (r = 0.63; P <0.001), but there was high interindividual variation. A high OF/plasma
THC ratio and a high OF THC/THCCOOH ratio indicated recent cannabis smoking. These data
document that OF does not reliably detect oral THC ingestion and OF THC concentrations do
not predict concurrent plasma concentrations after oral THC.

Plasma THC
Oral fluid THC

10
8

Plasma (micrograms/L)

4

Ist oral
THC dose

3

5

2

3

1

0
−20
B

5

80

−16

−12

−8

−4

0

0

4

Plasma THCCOOH
Oral fluid THCCOOH

60

60

40

40
20

20
0
−20

Ist oral
THC dose

−16

−12
−8
−4
0
Time from the first dose (h)

4

Oral fluid (ng/L)

Plasma (micrograms/L)

A

Oral fluid (micrograms/L)

Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics and Disposition in Alternative Matrices

0

Fig. 16.3 Median (n = 10) (A) ∆9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in plasma (■) and oral fluid (¡) and (B)
11-nor-9-carboxy-THC (THCCOOH) in plasma (■) and oral fluid (¡) time course following previously
self-­administered smoked cannabis and the first 20 mg oral THC dose. Times are based on first THC
administration.
Reproduced from Garry Milman, David M. Schwope, Eugene W. Schwilke, William D. Darwin, Deanna L. Kelly, Robert
S. Goodwin, David A. Gorelick, and Marilyn A. Huestis, Oral Fluid and Plasma Cannabinoid Ratios after Around-the-Clock
Controlled Oral Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol Administration, Clinical Chemistry, 57 (11), pp. 1597–1606 (c) 2011, American
Association for Clinical Chemistry, with permission. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2011.169490.

OF THC, CBD, CBN, and THCCOOH for up to 10.5 h following 5 and 15 mg synthetic oral
THC and low- (5.4 mg THC, 5.0 mg CBD) and high-doe (16.2 mg THC, 15.0 mg CBD) Sativex®
were determined in 14 occasional cannabis smokers (Fig. 16.4) (Lee et al. 2013). After oral THC,
OF THC concentrations decreased over time from baseline, reflecting residual THC excretion
from previously self-administered smoked cannabis. Also, CBD and CBN were rarely detected.
After Sativex®, THC, CBD and CBN increased greatly, peaking at 0.25–1 h. Median CBD/THC
and CBN/THC ratios were 0.82–1.34 and 0.04–0.06, respectively, reflecting the cannabinoid
composition of Sativex®. THCCOOH/THC ratios within 4.5 h post Sativex® were 1.6 ng/mg or
lower, always lower than after oral THC. THCCOOH/THC ratios increased throughout each session. Cannabinoid concentrations and ratios were compared to those following smoking of a 6.8%
THC cigarette. This study demonstrated that OF could monitor compliance with Sativex® therapy.
OF is the most promising biological matrix for roadside DUID testing (Huestis et al. 2011);
however, onsite tests previously lacked the sensitivity to detect cannabis smoking. This was a
major problem, as cannabis is the primary illicit drug reported in DUID surveys, and motor vehicle accidents and fatalities (Drummer et al. 2004; Lacey et al. 2009; Mann et. al. 2008). Recently,
the Draeger DrugTest® 5000 OF device was evaluated with OF samples collected 0.5 h before and

305

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

10000

5 mg THC
15 mg THC
Low Sativex®
High Sativex®
Placebo

A. CBD

Micrograms/L

1000
100

1

C. CBD

1000

Smoked cannabis
(6.8% THC)

100

1
Dose

–0.50.25 1
1000

10000

10

10

0.1
<LOQ

Micrograms/L

306

0.1
<LOQ
4.5

7.5

10.5

B. CBN
5 mg THC
15 mg THC
Low Sativex®
High Sativex®
Placebo

100

–0.5 0.251
1000

10

1

1
Dose

4.5

Δ Time (h)

7.5

10.5

2 3

4

6

22

D. CBN
Smoked cannabis
(6.8% THC)

100

10

<LOQ
–0.50.251

Dose

<LOQ
–0.5 0.25 1 2

3

4
6
Δ Time (h)

22

Fig. 16.4 Median cannabidiol (CBD; A) and cannabinol (CBN; B) oral fluid concentrations after 5 and
15 mg ∆9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), low-dose (5.4 mg THC + 5 mg CBD) and high-dose (16.2
mg THC + 15 mg CBD) oromucosal Sativex®, and placebo. Panels C and D show median CBD and
CBN time courses, respectively, after smoking one cannabis cigarette with 6.8% THC for comparison. Error bars indicate interquartile ranges.
Reprinted from Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 130 (1–3), Dayong Lee, Erin L. Karschner, Garry Milman, Allan J. Barnes,
Robert S. Goodwin, Marilyn A. Huestis, Can oral fluid cannabinoid testing monitor medication compliance and/or cannabis smoking during oral THC and oromucosal Sativex administration?, pp. 68–76, Copyright (2013), with permission
from Elsevier.

up to 22 h after ten chronic cannabis users smoked a 6.8% THC cigarette (Desrosiers et al. 2012).
2D-GCMS was utilized to quantify THC, THCCOOH, CBD, and CBN concentrations in simultaneously collected Quantisal™ OF samples (Lee et al. 2012). Diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, and
efficiency at the DrugTest® 5000’s 5 micrograms/L screening cutoff and various THC confirmation cutoffs were 86.2–90.7, 75.0–77.8, and 84.8–87.9%, respectively. Last detection times were
greater than 22 h at the LOQ, longer than previously suggested. THCCOOH confirmation minimized the potential for passive OF contamination and provided 22 h windows of detection. These
data document that an onsite OF testing device can sensitively and specifically identify cannabis
smoking at the roadside and in the workplace.
OF THC concentrations generally correlate with plasma concentrations and with pharmacodynamic effects; however, inter- and intrasubject variability precludes calculating a blood or plasma
concentration from an OF concentration (Milman et al. 2011a). Enforcement of drugged driving
legislation with OF testing should be supported by laws that specifically permit OF specimens
for screening and confirmation of drug use, or define OF screening, followed by confirmation of
presumptive positive tests with blood collection and analysis.

Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics and Disposition in Alternative Matrices

It is important to compare OF testing to established urine testing methods. OF results (Intercept®
collection) were compared to urine results from ten subjects who smoked a 20–25 mg THC cannabis cigarette (Huestis 2005). Specimens were screened by enzyme immunoassay with a 1.0
microgram/L cutoff and confirmed for THC by gas chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (GCMSMS) at 0.5 micrograms/L. OF specimens were not analyzed for THCCOOH due to
technology limitations. Urine specimens were tested for THCCOOH by enzyme immunoassay
at 50 micrograms/L and confirmed by GCMS at 15 micrograms/L. With these cutoffs, OF THC
was consistently positive for approximately 13 h (1–24) by GCMSMS, followed by interspersed
negative and positive specimens. Mean THC detection times for the last positive OF specimen
were 34 ± 11 (1–72) h. By comparison, THCCOOH appeared much later, after 4 h, in urine with
mean detection times of 58 ± 6 (16–72) h. A subsequent study of 77,218 OF specimens tested for
drugs of abuse in a commercial laboratory with immunoassay screening and confirmation cutoff
concentrations of 3 and 1.5 micrograms/L THC, respectively, reported a 3.2% cannabinoids detection rate. This positive rate was similar to that of urine specimens tested from different donors
with SAMHSA screening and confirmation cutoff concentrations of 50 micrograms/L and 15
micrograms/L THCCOOH (Cone et al. 2002).

16.4 Cannabinoids in sweat
To date, there are no published data on cannabinoids excretion in sweat following controlled
THC or cannabis administration. Sweat testing monitors cannabis use in drug treatment, criminal
justice, workplace drug testing, and clinical programs (Huestis 2005). Currently, there is a single
commercially available sweat collection device, the PharmCheck patch, offered by PharmChem
Laboratories, Inc. (Fort Worth, Texas, US). The patch is exchanged for a new one once each week
during treatment or parole officer visits. As for OF testing, this is a developing new technology
with much to be learned about cannabinoid sweat excretion pharmacokinetics, potential THC
reabsorption by the skin, possible THC degradation on the patch, and THC adsorption onto the
patch collection device. THC is the primary analyte detected in sweat, with little 11-OH-THC
or THCCOOH. THC (4–38 ng/patch) was identified in 20 known heroin abusers who wore the
PharmChek patch for 5 days during detoxification (Huestis 2005). Forehead swipes with cosmetic
pads monitored sweat cannabinoids in motorists suspected of DUID. THC, but no 11-OH-THC
or THCCOOH, was detected (4–152 ng/pad) in the sweat of 16 of 22 individuals testing positive
for urine cannabinoids. Cannabinoids were quantified in sweat from 11 chronic daily cannabis
smokers during 4 weeks of monitored sustained abstinence (Huestis et al. 2008). Sweat patches
worn the first week had THC at least 1 ng/patch with a mean ± SE of 3.9 ± 0.9 ng/patch. In week
2, eight of 11 had negative weekly patches; one subject produced THC positive patches (>0.4 ng/
patch) for 4 weeks. After oral 14.8 mg THC/day doses for 5 days, no patches were THC-positive,
while THC in concurrently collected plasma samples were positive but with concentrations less
than 6.1 micrograms/L.

16.5 Cannabinoids in hair
Multiple mechanisms contribute to cannabinoid incorporation into hair including diffusion
from capillaries surrounding the hair bulb, from sebum secreted onto the hair shaft, from sweat
excreted onto hair above the skin surface, and from environmental drug contamination. Cannabis
is primarily smoked, providing an opportunity for environmental contamination of hair with
THC in cannabis smoke. Basic drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamine concentrate in hair
due to ionic bonding to melanin, the pigment in hair that determines hair color. The more neutral

307

308

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

and lipophilic THC is not highly bound to melanin, resulting in much lower THC concentrations
in hair compared to other drugs of abuse. Usually THC is present in hair at higher concentrations
than THCCOOH (Huestis 2005). Despite the low concentrations, the advantage of measuring
THCCOOH in hair is the same as for OF testing, THCCOOH is not present in cannabis smoke,
avoiding the issue of passive exposure from the environment. Analysis of cannabinoids in hair is
challenging due to the high analytical sensitivity required to quantify femtograms to picograms
THCCOOH per mg hair; GCMSMS provides acceptable sensitivity.
It is difficult to conduct controlled studies on cannabinoid disposition in hair because of the inability to differentiate administered from previously self-administered cannabis. One solution would be
administration of isotopically labeled drug but to date there have been no such studies. Hair testing
advantages include a wide window of drug detection (months), a less invasive specimen collection
procedure, and the ability to collect a later second specimen. However, one of the weakest aspects of
cannabinoids hair testing is the low sensitivity of drug detection in this alternative matrix. Only about
one-third of nondaily smokers and two-thirds of daily smokers had positive GCMSMS cannabinoid
hair tests with LOD = 1 microgram/g for THC and 0.1 micrograms/g for THCCOOH (Huestis et al.
2007). All participants had positive urine cannabinoid tests at the time of hair collection.
In another study of 12 daily cannabis smokers and ten nonsmokers, at least one of the cannabinoids, THC, CBN, CBD (LOQ = 0.1 micrograms/g), was found in daily smokers’ hair and
none in nonsmokers’ head hair (Skopp et al. 2007). THC concentrations did not correlate with
self-reported dose, but the sum of THC, CBD, and CBN correlated with estimated total cannabis
dose over 3 months (r = 0.71, p = 0.014).
Hair from 412 self-reported cannabis smokers contained THCCOOH 0.06–33.4 ng/g hair (LOQ =
0.05 ng/g) for those with a positive urine cannabinoid test and 0.05–7.2 ng/g for those whose urine was
negative (Han et al. 2011a, 2011b, 2011c). The hair root bulb had higher THCCOOH concentrations
than the hair shaft, and pubic hair had higher concentrations than head hair. Cannabinoids remain in
hair for months to years, although decreasing concentrations are usually noted farther from the scalp,
due to normal hygiene and ultraviolet degradation of drugs.

16.6 Cannabidiol pharmacokinetics
CBD is a nonpsychoactive natural constituent of Cannabis sativa that possesses pharmacological activity of interest for therapeutic applications. CBD has neuroprotective, analgesic, sedating, antiemetic, antispasmodic, and anti-inflammatory effects (Huestis 2005). In addition, CBD
reportedly blocks anxiety produced by THC and is useful in autoimmune disease treatment. CBD
pharmacokinetic studies are warranted by these potential therapeutic applications and needed
resolution of the controversy over whether CBD alters THC pharmacokinetics.
CBD metabolism is similar to THC’s, with primary oxidation of C9 to the hydroxy and carboxylic acid moieties and side chain oxidation. Like THC, CBD is subjected to a significant first-pass
effect; however, unlike THC a large proportion is excreted unchanged in the feces. Most in vitro
studies support that CBD does not affect THC pharmacokinetics (Huestis 2005).
Sativex® , the prescription drug derived from cannabis-based medicinal extracts, contains
approximately 1:1 THC and CBD. Sativex® effectiveness is being evaluated in Phase 3 trials as an
adjunct to opioid therapy for cancer pain. Few adverse side effects were observed. A controlled
administration study comparing Sativex® to oral THC administration confirmed that CBD did
not modulate THC effects through pharmacokinetic mechanisms, except for a slightly slower
conversion of 11-OH-THC to THCCOOH (Fig. 16.5) (Karschner et al. 2011a, 2011b). CBD
coadministration did not significantly affect total clearance, Vd and THC metabolites’ terminal

Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics and Disposition in Alternative Matrices

4

A

B
10 THC
Placebo
5 mg oral THC
15 mg oral THC 8
low Sativex®
6
high Sativex®

CBD

3
2

4

Micrograms/L

1

2

0

0
0

8

2

4

6

8

C

10

0
120

11-OH-THC

6

90

4

60

2

30

0

2

4

6

8

10

4

6

8

10

D
THCCOOH

0
0

2

4

6

8

10
Time (h)

0

2

Fig. 16.5 Median (n = 9) cannabidiol (CBD), ∆9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 11-hydroxy-THC
(11-OH-THC), and 11-nor-9-carboxy-THC (THCCOOH) plasma concentrations following controlled
administration of placebo, 5 and 15 mg oral THC and low-dose (5.4 mg THC + 5 mg CBD) and highdose (16.2 mg THC + 15 mg CBD) oromucosal Sativex®.
Reproduced from Erin L. Karschner, W. David Darwin, Robert S. Goodwin, Stephen Wright and Marilyn A. Huestis, Plasma
Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics following Controlled Oral Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Oromucosal Cannabis Extract
Administration, Clinical Chemistry, 57 (1), pp. 66–75 (c) 2010, American Association for Clinical Chemistry, with permission. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2010.152439.

elimination half-lives at this 1:1 ratio. CBD bioavailability following smoking averaged 31%
(range 11–45%) as compared to intravenously administered drug (Huestis 2005).
Similar results were obtained when comparing sublingual administration of 25 mg THC to
a combination of 25 mg THC and 25 mg CBD in cannabis-based medicinal extracts (Huestis
2005). There were no statistically significant differences in mean THC C max, half-life, AUC for
THC, and 11-OH-THC when CBD was coadministered with THC. The only statistically significant difference was a later time for maximum THC concentration. Despite administration of
equivalent THC and CBD amounts, lower plasma CBD concentrations were always observed. In
a separate evaluation of 10 mg THC and 10 mg CBD from a cannabis-based medicine extract,
THC, 11-OH-THC and CBD pharmacokinetics were determined after sublingual, buccal, and
oropharyngeal and oral administration. All three analytes were measurable 30 min after dosing,
with higher THC than CBD concentrations. 11-OH-THC generally exceeded THC concentrations within 45 min. Mean THC, CBD, and 11-OH-THC Cmax values were less than 5, less than
2, and less than 7 micrograms/L across all administration routes. High intra- and intersubject
variability was noted.
CBD and CBN Cmax in blood (1.3, 2.4 micrograms/L) and plasma (2.0, 3.6 micrograms/L) were
determined in ten subjects after smoking 6.8% THC cigarettes containing 0.25% CBD and 0.21%
CBN; these analytes were not detectable (LOQ = 1.0 micrograms/L) 1 h post dose (Schwope et al.

309

310

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

2011a). CBD and CBN in blood identified recent cannabis smoking, but were inclusionary, not
exclusionary, as these analytes were not present in some subjects at all after cannabis smoking.
Simultaneous OF maximum THC, CBD, and CBN concentrations occurred within 0.5 h of smoking initiation, with medians of 644, 30.4, and 49.0 micrograms/L, respectively (Lee et al. 2012b).

16.7 Cannabinol pharmacokinetics
CBN is a natural constituent of Cannabis sativa with approximately 10% of THC’s activity (Huestis
2005). CBN metabolism is similar to THC’s with hydroxylation of C9 as the primary mode of
metabolism. Due to one additional aromatic ring, CBN is metabolized less extensively and slower
than THC. The average bioavailability of a smoked CBN dose, as compared to i.v. administration,
was 41% with a range of 8–77%.

16.8 Interpretation of cannabinoid concentrations

in biological fluids
16.8.1 Prediction models using blood and plasma for estimation

of cannabis exposure

There continues to be controversy in the interpretation of blood cannabinoid results but some
general concepts have wide support. There is a dose–concentration relationship for smoked THC
and THC plasma concentrations (Huestis 2005). It is well established that peak effects appear rapidly after smoking initiation, that plasma THC concentrations decline prior to the time for peak
effects, and that THC and THCCOOH concentrations reach equivalency within 30–45 min after
smoking initiation. Recent exposure (6–8 h) and possible impairment are linked to plasma THC
concentrations in excess of 2–3 micrograms/L in occasional cannabis smokers. Interpretation is
complicated by intra- and intersubject variability, variation in blood/plasma ratios (usually about
0.5), and by residual THC and THCCOOH concentrations found in blood of frequent cannabis
smokers (Karschner et al. 2009).
Accurate prediction of time of last cannabis exposure provides valuable information in establishing the role of cannabis as a contributing factor to events under investigation. Two mathematical models were developed for prediction of time of last cannabis use from analysis of a single
plasma specimen for cannabinoids (Huestis 2005). Model I is based on THC concentrations and
Model II on the ratio of THCCOOH to THC in plasma. Both correctly predict exposure times
within a 95% confidence interval (CI) for more than 90% of specimens evaluated. The models
were validated following different routes of administration, smoking multiple cannabis cigarettes
and plasma concentrations as low as 0.5 micrograms/L (Huestis 2005; Huestis et al. 2005, 2006).
Each model predicted the range of time when cannabis was smoked or otherwise ingested with
95% CI established by a calculated upper and lower time. An important finding was that a more
accurate prediction of time of last cannabis use was obtained by using the time interval defined
by the lowest and highest times from both Models I and II. Also, inaccurate predictions were all
overestimates of the actual time interval; there were no underestimates which might adversely
affect the blood donor by falsely determining that he was impaired.
The models’ accuracy in predicting time of last cannabis use in blood and plasma samples from
ten chronic daily cannabis smokers receiving escalating doses of THC (40–120 mg) daily for 8
days was examined (Karschner et al. 2012). Predictive models accurately estimated last cannabis
exposure in 96% and 100% of specimens collected within 1–5 h after a single oral THC dose and
throughout multiple dosing, respectively. However, the models were only 60% and 12.5% accurate

Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics and Disposition in Alternative Matrices

12.5 and 22.5h after the last THC dose, respectively, in chronic daily cannabis smokers who had
large residual THCCOOH concentrations.
Trying to predict time of last cannabis use for chronic daily cannabis smokers is a special challenge, and an important one, for example, when individuals are in cannabis dependence treatment, or when they are involved in motor vehicle or occupational accidents. Early studies found
THC, 11-OH-THC, and THCCOOH plasma concentrations in frequent cannabis users of 0.86
± 0.22, 0.46 ± 0.17 and 45.8 ± 13.1 micrograms/L, respectively, a minimum of 12 h after the last
smoked dose (Huestis 2005). We recently had the opportunity to investigate cannabinoid excretion in chronic daily cannabis smokers during monitored sustained abstinence, required prior
to administering rimonabant, the first CB1 cannabinoid receptor antagonist. In this inpatient
study, of 25 chronic daily cannabis smokers, we quantified THC in blood for 7 days of cannabis
abstinence (Karschner et al. 2009). Surprisingly, blood THC concentrations decreased after 24
h, but then in some individuals remained fairly constant for 7 days, while in others negative and
positive THC concentrations fluctuated over the 7 days. All five participants who were THCpositive for 7 days were females. More recently, THC, 11-OH-THC and THCCOOH (LOQ = 0.25
micrograms/L for THC and THCCOOH; 0.5 micrograms/L for 11-OH-THC) were quantified
in daily blood specimens collected from 30 daily cannabis smokers during sustained abstinence
over 30 days (Bergamaschi et al. 2013). Of the 30 participants, 27 were THC-positive on admission, with a median (range) concentration of 1.4 micrograms/L (0.3–6.3). THC decreased gradually; only one of 11 participants was negative at 26 days, two of five remained THC-positive (0.3
micrograms/L) for 30 days, and 5.0% of participants had THC 1.0 micrograms/L or higher for 12
days. Median 11-OH-THC concentrations were 1.1 micrograms/L on admission, with no results
greater than or equal to 1.0 micrograms/L 24 h later. THCCOOH detection rates were 96.7% on
admission, decreasing slowly to 95.7% and 85.7% on days 8 and 22, respectively; four of five participants remained THCCOOH positive (0.6–2.7 micrograms/L) after 30 days, and one remained
positive on discharge at 33 days.
16.8.2 Interpretation of urinary cannabinoid concentrations

Urine is a popular matrix for detecting prior cannabis use because it is relatively easy to analyze and offers long detection times of days to weeks. Most current workplace drug testing,
treatment, and judicial programs identify total THCCOOH in urine to detect prior cannabis
ingestion. The principal question asked by those administering these programs is whether or
not the worker, patient, or parolee smoked cannabis in the preceding days. However, more
challenging questions arise in cannabis dependence treatment such as “Can urine cannabinoid
concentrations identify smoked cannabis relapse?” One in ten individuals that smokes cannabis develops problematic cannabis usage, and as the most commonly used illicit drug, this
results in cannabis treatment admissions being higher than for all other drugs of dependence
except alcohol. As residual cannabinoid excretion can be more than 30 days in chronic, frequent smokers, it becomes critical to differentiate excretion following new cannabis use from
residual excretion.
A model exists to answer this question based on creatinine-corrected THCCOOH concentrations (Huestis 2005). Creatinine normalization is necessary to reduce the variability in sequential
urine THCCOOH concentrations due to intrinsic dilution. The model evaluates the ratio between
creatinine normalized THCCOOH concentrations for a urine specimen and any preceding specimen. The original study found that the most accurate (85.4%) specimen ratio for differentiating
new use from residual excretion was 0.5, i.e., a ratio higher than this value indicated new use

311

312

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

(Huestis 2005). This ratio provided 80.1% sensitivity, 90.2% specificity, and 5.6% false-positive
and 7.4% false-negative predictions. Program managers can select a specimen ratio to obtain
acceptable false-positive and false-negative results.
This model was further improved by also considering the time interval between specimens
(Smith et al. 2009). A table with maximum, 95% below, and median THCCOOH/creatinine
ratios was developed. For the time interval between two specimens and selected level of certainty
desired, a ratio above the value in the table indicates new use.
These models were not accurate for detecting new cannabis use in daily cannabis smokers
due to extended THC excretion from body stores. Since daily smokers are frequently those in
treatment programs, new models were needed. Schwilke et al. (2011) developed a model with
creatinine normalized THCCOOH concentrations in 48 daily cannabis smokers who resided
on a closed research unit during abstinence for up to 30 days. More than 120,000 urine excretion pairs were included to develop the model. The model was validated with urine results from
67 different daily smokers who provided specimens each day for 30 days. The model developed
was exponential with two parameters, initial urine specimen creatinine normalized THCCOOH
concentration and the time interval between collections. Subjects were placed in groups based on
their initial normalized urine THCCOOH concentration. Prediction intervals provided upper
ratio limits for any urine specimen pair at a program selected probability level between 80% and
99%. Ratios above these limits suggest new use. Two additional rules were necessary to achieve
high sensitivity and specificity for predicting new cannabis use. The first rule took into account
that the donor may have smoked just prior to the first specimen collection, and THCCOOH urine
concentrations may not have peaked, and the second rule accounted for the 8% of daily cannabis
smokers whose THCCOOH/creatinine ratio was 800 ng/mg or higher in the first specimen (see
Schwilke et al. 2011, for details on implementing these rules and models). The models for predicting time of cannabis ingestion that are important for interpretation of results in workplace drug
testing, treatment, and judicial programs were made possible by the many thorough studies of
cannabis pharmacokinetics.

16.9 Conclusions
Controlled cannabinoid administration studies simultaneously collecting pharmacodynamic
and pharmacokinetic data provide the scientific basis for understanding mechanisms of drug
action, interpreting cannabinoid results, and developing evidence-based drug policy and legislation. Current research focuses on alternative body fluids and tissues as each provides unique data
about an individual’s drug use history, and each offers advantages and limitations for drug testing
in the many different monitoring programs. Characterizing human cannabinoid pharmacokinetics enables us to better understand the onset, peak, and duration of pharmacodynamic effects,
the mechanism of drug–drug interactions, develop models that aid our interpretation of results,
and comprehend the differences between acute and chronic cannabis exposure. Expanding the
number of cannabinoid analytes quantified and applying different cutoff concentrations for these
analytes in different alternative matrices can define windows of drug detection appropriate for
achieving the goals of the drug monitoring program. For instance, workplace and pain management testing programs want the longest possible detection windows, while driving under the
influence of cannabis testing would like a detection window that best matches the window of drug
impairment. Treatment programs need to identify cannabis relapse between visits usually occurring between one and three times per week, so an intermediate detection window is ideal, and for
antidoping monitoring, cannabis intake is only prohibited “in competition” requiring a different

Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics and Disposition in Alternative Matrices

set of parameters. Controlled cannabinoid administration studies following different routes of
drug administration to different populations of cannabis users, and monitoring the spectrum of
cannabinoids present within the cannabis plant and their metabolic products provide the data
required to understand cannabinoid effects, to accurately interpret cannabinoid results and to
optimize cannabinoid monitoring.

Acknowledgments
Author’s contribution to the Work was done as part of the Author’s official duties as an NIH
employee and is a Work of the United States Government. Therefore, copyright may not be established in the United States.

References
Abraham, T.T., Lowe, R.H., Pirnay, S.O., Darwin, W.D., and Huestis, M.A. (2007). Simultaneous GC-EIMS determination of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, 11-hydroxy-delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, and
11-nor-9-carboxy-delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in human urine following tandem enzyme-alkaline
hydrolysis. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 31, 477–485.
Bergamaschi, M.M., Karschner, E.L., Goodwin, R.S., et al. (2013). Impact of prolonged cannabinoid excretion in chronic daily cannabis smokers’ blood on per se drugged driving laws. Clinical Chemistry, 59,
519–526.
Bosker, W.M. and Huestis, M.A. (2009). Oral fluid testing for drugs of abuse. Clinical Chemistry, 55, 1910–1931.
Brunet, B., Doucet, C., Venisse, N., et al. (2006). Validation of large white pig as an animal model for the
study of cannabinoids metabolism: application to the study of THC distribution in tissues. Forensic
Science International, 161, 169–174.
Chu, M., Gerostamoulos, D., Beyer, J., Rodda, J., Boorman, M., and Drummer, O.H. (2012). The incidence of drugs of impairment in oral fluid from random roadside testing. Forensic Science International,
215, 28–31.
Cone, E.J., Presley, L., Lehrer, M., et al. (2002). Oral fluid testing for drugs of abuse: positive prevalence
rates by Intercept immunoassay screening and GC-MS-MS confirmation and suggested cutoff concentrations. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 26, 541–546.
Coulter, C., Garnier, M., and Moore, C. (2012). Analysis of tetrahydrocannabinol and its metabolite,
11-nor-delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid, in oral fluid using liquid chromatography with
tandem mass spectrometry. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 36, 413–417.
Day, D., Kuntz D.J., Feldman, M., and Presley, L. (2006). Detection of THCA in oral fluid by GC-MS-MS.
Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 30, 645–650.
Desrosiers, N.A., Lee, D., Schwope, D.M., et al. (2012). On-site test for cannabinoids in oral fluid. Clinical
Chemistry, 58, 1418–1425.
Drummer, O.H., Gerostamoulos, J., Batziris, H., et al. (2004). The involvement of drugs in drivers of
motor vehicles killed in Australian road traffic crashes. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 36, 239–248.
Goodwin, R.S., Gustafson, R.A., Barnes, A., Nebro, A., Moolchan, E.T., and Huestis, M.A. (2006).
Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol, 11-hydroxy-delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and 11-nor-9-carboxydelta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol in human plasma after controlled oral administration of cannabinoids.
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring, 28, 545–551.
Gorelick, D.A., Goodwin, R.S., Schwilke, E., et al. (2013). Tolerance to effects of high-dose oral delta9tetrahydrocannabinol and plasma cannabinoid concentrations in male daily cannabis smokers. Journal
of Analytical Toxicology, 37, 11–16.
Han, E., Choi, H., Lee, S., Chung, H., and Song, J.M. (2011a). A study on the concentrations of 11-nordelta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid (THCCOOH) in hair root and whole hair. Forensic
Science International, 210, 201–205.

313

314

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Han, E., Choi, H., Lee, S., Chung, H., and Song, J.M. (2011b). A comparative study on the concentrations of 11-nor-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid (THCCOOH) in head and pubic hair.
Forensic Science International, 212, 238–241.
Han, E., Park, Y., Kim, E., et al. (2011c). Simultaneous analysis of delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and
11-nor-9-carboxy-tetrahydrocannabinol in hair without different sample preparation and derivatization
by gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis,
55, 1096–1103.
Houwing, S., Hagenzieker, M., Mathissen, R.P., et al. (2013). Random and systematic errors in casecontrol studies calculating the injury risk of driving under the influence of psychoactive substances.
Accident Analysis & Prevention, 52, 144–153.
Huestis, M.A. (2005). Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of the plant cannabinoids. In: R.G. Pertwee (ed.).
Cannabinoids. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology. Vol. 168. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 657–690.
Huestis, M.A., Barnes, A., and Smith, M.L. (2005). Estimating the time of last cannabis use from plasma
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol and 11-nor-9-carboxy-delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol concentrations.
Clinical Chemistry, 51, 2289–2295.
Huestis, M.A., ElSohly, M., Nebro, W., Barnes, A., Gustafson, R.A., and Smith, M.L. (2006). Estimating
time of last oral ingestion of cannabis from plasma THC and THCCOOH concentrations. Therapeutic
Drug Monitoring, 28, 540–544.
Huestis, M.A., Gustafson, R.A., Moolchan, E.T., et al. (2007). Cannabinoid concentrations in hair from
documented cannabis users. Forensic Science International, 169, 129–136.
Huestis, M.A., Henningfield, J.E., and Cone, E.J. (1992). Blood cannabinoids. I. Absorption of THC and
formation of 11-OH-THC and THCCOOH during and after smoking marijuana. Journal of Analytical
Toxicology, 16, 276–282.
Huestis, M.A., Scheidweiler, K.B., Saito, T., et al. (2008). Excretion of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in
sweat. Forensic Science International, 174, 173–177.
Huestis, M.A., Verstraete, A., Kwong, T.C., Morland, J., Vincent, M.J., and de la Torre, R. (2011). Oral
fluid testing: promises and pitfalls. Clinical Chemistry, 57, 805–810.
Karschner, E.L., Darwin, W.D., Goodwin, R.S., Wright, S., and Huestis, M.A. (2011a). Plasma cannabinoid pharmacokinetics following controlled oral delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol and oromucosal cannabis
extract administration. Clinical Chemistry, 57, 66–75.
Karschner, E.L., Darwin, W.D., McMahon, R.P., et al. (2011b). Subjective and physiological effects after
controlled Sativex and oral THC administration. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 89, 400–407.
Karschner, E.L., Schwilke, E.W., Lowe, R.H., et al. (2009). Do delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol concentrations
indicate recent use in chronic cannabis users? Addiction, 104, 2041–2048.
Karschner, E.L., Schwope, D.M., Schwilke, E.W. et al. (2012). Predictive model accuracy in estimating last
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) intake from plasma and whole blood cannabinoid concentrations
in chronic, daily cannabis smokers administered subchronic oral THC. Drug and Alcohol Dependence,
125, 313–319.
Lacey, J.H., Kelley-Baker, T., Furr-Holden, D., et al. (2009). 2007 National Roadside Survey of Alcohol and
Drug Use by Drivers: Drug Results. Report DOT HS 811 249. Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration Office of Behavioral Safety Research.
Langel, K., Engblom, C., Pehrsson, A., Gunnar, T., Ariniemi, K., and Lillsunde, P. (2008). Drug testing in
oral fluid-evaluation of sample collection devices. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 32, 393–401.
Lee, D., Karschner, E.L., Milman, G., Barnes, A.J., Goodwin, R.S., and Huestis, M.A. (2013). Can oral
fluid cannabinoid testing monitor medication compliance and/or cannabis smoking during oral THC
and oromucosal Sativex administration? Drug Alcohol Dependence, 130(1–3), 68–76.
Lee, D., Milman, G., Schwope, D.M., Barnes, A.J., Gorelick, D.A., and Huestis, M.A. (2012a).
Cannabinoid stability in authentic oral fluid after controlled cannabis smoking. Clinical Chemistry,
58(7), 1101–1109.

®

®

Cannabinoid Pharmacokinetics and Disposition in Alternative Matrices

Lee, D., Schwope, D.M., Milman, G., Barnes, A.J., Gorelick, D.A., and Huestis, M.A. (2012b). Cannabinoid
disposition in oral fluid after controlled smoked cannabis. Clinical Chemistry, 58(4), 748–756.
Lowe, R.H., Abraham, T.T., Darwin, W.D., Herning, R., Cadet, J.L., and Huestis, M.A. (2009). Extended
urinary delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol excretion in chronic cannabis users precludes use as a biomarker
of new drug exposure. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 105(1–2), 24–32.
Mann, R.E., Stoduto, G., Macdonald, S., and Brands, B. (2008). Cannabis use and driving: implications
for public health and transport policy. European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction
(EMCDDA), 2, 171–198.
Milman, G., Barnes, A.J., Lowe, R.H., and Huestis, M.A. (2010). Simultaneous quantification of cannabinoids and metabolites in oral fluid by two-dimensional gas chromatography mass spectrometry. Journal
of Chromatography A, 1217, 1513–1521.
Milman, G., Barnes, A.J., Schwope, D.M., et al. (2011b). Cannabinoids and metabolites in expectorated oral fluid after 8 days of controlled around-the-clock oral THC administration. Analytical and
Bioanalytical Chemistry, 401(2), 599–607.
Milman, G., Schwope, D.M., Schwilke, E.W., et al. (2011a). Oral fluid and plasma cannabinoid ratios
after around-the-clock controlled oral delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol administration. Clinical Chemistry,
57(11), 1597–1606.
Moore, C., Coulter, C., Rana, S., Vincent, M., and Soares, J. (2006a). Analytical procedure for the determination of the marijuana metabolite 11-nor-delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid in oral fluid
specimens. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 30, 409–412.
Moore, C., Coulter, C., Uges, D., et al. (2011). Cannabinoids in oral fluid following passive exposure to
marijuana smoke. Forensic Science International, 212, 227–230.
Moore, C., Ross, W., Coulter, C., et al. (2006b). Detection of the marijuana metabolite 11-nor-delta9tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid in oral fluid specimens and its contribution to positive results
in screening assays. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 30, 413–418.
Pomahacova, B., Van der Kooy, F., and Verpoorte, R. (2009). Cannabis smoke condensate III: the cannabinoid content of vaporised Cannabis sativa. Inhalation Toxicology, 21(13), 1108–1112.
Scheidweiler, K.B., Desrosiers, N.A., and Huestis, M.A. (2012). Simultaneous quantification of free and
glucuronidated cannabinoids in human urine by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.
Clinica Chimica Acta, 413(23–24), 1839–1847.
Schwilke, E.W., Gullberg, R.G., Darwin, W.D., et al. (2011). Differentiating new cannabis use from residual urinary cannabinoid excretion in chronic, daily cannabis users. Addiction, 106, 499–506.
Schwilke, E.W., Schwope, D.M., Karschner, E.L., et al. (2009). Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
11-hydroxy-THC, and 11-nor-9-carboxy-THC plasma pharmacokinetics during and after continuous
high-dose oral THC. Clinical Chemistry, 55, 2180–2189.
Schwope, D.M., Scheidweiler, K.B., and Huestis, M.A. (2011a). Direct quantification of cannabinoids
and cannabinoid glucuronides in whole blood by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry.
Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 401, 1273–1283.
Schwope, D.M., Karschner, E.L., Gorelick, D.A., and Huestis, M.A. (2011b). Identification of recent cannabis use: whole-blood and plasma free and glucuronidated cannabinoid pharmacokinetics following
controlled smoked cannabis administration. Clinical Chemistry, 57, 1406–1414.
Skopp, G. and Potsch, L. (2004). An investigation of the stability of free and glucuronidated 11-nor-delta9tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid in authentic urine samples. Journal of Analytical Toxicology. 28,
35–40.
Skopp, G., Strohbeck-Kuehner, P., Mann, K., and Hermann, D. (2007). Deposition of cannabinoids in
hair after long-term use of cannabis. Forensic Science International. 170, 46–50.
Smith, M.L., Barnes, A.J., and Huestis, M.A. (2009). Identifying new cannabis use with urine creatininenormalized THCCOOH concentrations and time intervals between specimen collections. Journal of
Analytical Toxicology, 33 (4), 185–189.

315

316

PHARMACOLOGY, PHARMACOKINETICS, METABOLISM, AND FORENSICS

Steinmeyer, S., Ohr, H., Maurer, H. J., and Moeller, M.R. (2001). Practical aspects of roadside tests for
administrative traffic offences in Germany. Forensic Science International, 121, 33–36.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2011). Mandatory guidelines for federal
workplace drug testing programs; request for information regarding specific issues related to the use of
the oral fluid specimen for drug testing. Federal Register, 76(112), 34086–34087.
Van der Kooy, F., Pomahacova, B., and Verpoorte, R. (2009). Cannabis smoke condensate II: influence of
tobacco on tetrahydrocannabinol levels. Inhalation Toxicology, 21(2), 87–90.
Verstraete, A.G. (2005). Oral fluid testing for driving under the influence of drugs: history, recent progress
and remaining challenges. Forensic Science International, 150, 143–150.

Part 3

Medicinal Cannabis and
Cannabinoids: Clinical Data
Ethan B. Russo

Part 3 Overview
In Chapter 17, Hazekamp and Pappas examine self-medication with cannabis
and its various controversies, methods of administration, pros and cons,
pitfalls, and political fallout.
Chapter 18 by Reiman probes the legal gray areas of cannabis dispensaries,
compassion clubs, and coffee shops and their psychosocial and medical
implications.
In Chapter 19, Thomson and Langfield summarize the seemingly Byzantine
paths that cannabis-based medicines must take to attain regulatory approval
as full-fledged pharmaceuticals in Europe and North America, serving as a
practical blueprint for any such endeavor.
Wright and Guy bring their experience in pharmaceutical development to
an elucidation of the benefits and pitfalls of cannabis-based medicines in the
modern arena in Chapter 20.
In Chapter 21, Ware details the history and development of synthetic
cannabinoids, specifically nabilone, a tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) analogue,
and Marinol®, a synthetically-derived THC.
Notcutt and Clarke provide in Chapter 22 a British perspective on
prescription cannabinoids that offers a practical guide to their usage.

Chapter 17

Self-Medication with Cannabis
Arno Hazekamp and George Pappas

17.1 Introduction
The medicinal use of cannabis is slowly gaining a more general acceptance worldwide. Canada
(since 2001) and the Netherlands (since 2003) have government-run programs, in which quality-­
controlled herbal cannabis is supplied by specialized and licensed companies. Several other
countries are now setting up their own programs (Israel, Czech Republic, Switzerland) or import
products from the Dutch program (Italy, Finland, Germany, Switzerland). In the US, despite
strong opposition by the federal government, so far 18 states including the District of Columbia
have introduced laws to permit “medical marijuana use” (Americans for Safe Access 2012). In
these states, patients grow it on their own or collectively, or obtain it from larger growers that act
as caregivers for groups of patients. In some states, large-scale operations are licensed to supply the
entire demand, but almost no official quality control standards have been released so far. But no
matter how cannabis is supplied in all of these different programs, it is usually left up to patients
themselves to decide how to administer the herb. Self-medication with cannabis is therefore probably the most common way of using cannabinoids medicinally. Consequently, there may be a lot to
learn from the actual experiences of patients self-medicating with cannabis products worldwide.
Self-medication is inherently difficult to study, as it does not happen in the convenient and
controlled setting of a laboratory or hospital. Currently, little published data is available on the
extent of medicinal cannabis use and the characteristics of patients involved in it. The limited survey data, case reports, and other “soft” means of gathering information that exist make it hard to
draw firm quantitative conclusions that can inform clinical practice on how to prescribe cannabis
adequately. Fortunately, there is a growing interest in performing scientific studies (Hazekamp
and Heerdink 2013; Janichek and Reiman 2012) and large-scale surveys (Hazekamp et al. 2013)
on these patient populations, to contribute to the understanding of cannabinoid-based medicine
by asking self-medicating patients detailed questions about their experiences.
At the same time, the policy developments that are designed to accommodate legitimate and
qualified users are fiercely debated by medical authorities, law enforcement agencies, and politicians around the world, and sometimes with good reason. Although cannabis seems to fill some
urgent medical needs, many current systems leave enough incentive for recreational users to act
as pseudopatients in order to obtain legal protection for using cannabis. Furthermore, while safety
of cannabis is generally accepted to be within the range often deemed to be acceptable for other
medications, clinical trials have not yet been able to supply a clear answer on what are supposed
to be the “real” medical indications for cannabis use. Finally, there is still much to learn about
the risks of potential contaminations with pesticides, growth-enhancing chemicals, microbes,
or heavy metals, especially in the absence of quality control. For all these reasons, physicians are
often hesitant to play the role of prescriber or “gatekeeper,” even in the official government programs of Canada (Sullivan 2012) and the Netherlands (Hazekamp and Heerdink 2013).

320

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Unfortunately, on both sides of this discussion, arguments are all too often based on personal
experiences, political intentions, and emotions, rather than on the growing scientific understanding we have of the cannabis plant. As a result, both the beneficial and harmful aspects of cannabis
use may have become somewhat inflated, ranging from “cannabis cures cancer” and “it never
killed anyone” to “cannabis will make you psychotic and addicted.” The chemical diversity of the
hundreds of varieties of cannabis that are in use today certainly does little to bring certainty to this
discourse. Therefore, an important goal in the discussion on the pros and cons of self-medication
with cannabis should be to find a sustainable supply model that can fulfil the requirements of
medical authorities and policymakers (e.g., standardization, quality control, safety), as well as
those of patients and their physicians (e.g., choice of variety and administration form, whole
plant preparations), while making a strong but balanced effort to minimize diversion and abuse.
Finding balance is crucial, and ensuring that we advance our scientific understanding of cannabis
use is the key.
This chapter summarizes some important aspects of the medicinal use of cannabis, including
clinical data, administration forms, quality control, dosing, and differences between cannabis
varieties. The perspective of the self-medicating patient will be covered by discussing relevant
issues such as typical user characteristics, cost, and the social aspects of self-medication. Although
the term “medicinal/medical cannabis” is often used, we prefer to use the phrasing “medicinal
use of cannabis” in this book chapter instead. While this difference is only subtle, it signifies that
cannabis is not inherently medicinal, because the therapeutic effects depend on the variety used,
the medical condition it is used for, and a range of other choices such as administration form and
dosing regimen. In addition, the term “medicinal cannabis” may imply that the product used is
of medical quality (quality controlled, standardized, etc.) which is often not the case with selfmedication. We consider it therefore more correct to refer to the use of cannabis with the intention
of creating therapeutic effects. Hence, the term: medicinal use of cannabis.

17.2 Cannabis and medicine: an uneasy combination
According to some, herbal cannabis, also known as marijuana, is a substance whose abuse potential is well documented, but whose benefits are poorly characterized. However, this view overlooks the fact that the harmfulness of cannabis abuse is not as widely accepted as often assumed
(Nutt et al. 2007), and that some therapeutic effects claimed by patients are, in fact, clinically supported and sometimes even produced by registered medicines. On the other hand, there is indeed
still much we need to learn about topics such as differences between cannabis varieties, synergy of
cannabis components, and the sociocultural role of medicinal cannabis.
Unlike opioids, another class of controlled substances with a long history of debate, cannabis
and cannabinoid are rarely discussed in medical school or residency. Even the existence or function of the ubiquitous endocannabinoid system seems largely unknown among medical professionals. As a result, it seems hard to reach any comfortable consensus on where the line may be
drawn between the appropriate medical use and the abuse of this plant. Instead, what we observe
is an interesting polarization of opinions on cannabis (Ware 2012). Addiction workers, concerned
on the one hand by increases in problematic cannabis use, have on the other hand also reported
that cannabis has been used successfully in harm-reduction programs targeting more addictive
substances, such as opiates (heroin), cocaine, or alcohol (e.g., Reiman 2009). Psychiatrists, alerted
about adolescent cannabis use and psychosis, are also aware of positive effects of cannabinoids
on posttraumatic stress (Passie et al. 2012) and depression (Mikale et al. 2013). Pain specialists, intrigued by the effects of cannabis on pain, sleep, and anxiety, are equally concerned about

Self-Medication with Cannabis

drug-seeking behavior and functional impairment. And parents, worried about the dangerous
interest children show toward cannabis, are simultaneously interested in the genuine pain relief
that the drug may offer loved ones who need it.
While the reductionist approach of modern medicine has already been applied to cannabis for
decades, the subsequent development of cannabinoid-based medication—mainly based on delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) and cannabidiol (CBD)—has not been able to significantly
reduce the worldwide use of cannabis as a medicine. Cannabis seems stuck in the middle; on the
one hand too potent to be regulated as an herbal (or alternative) medicine, on the other hand too
herbal to be regarded as conventional medicine. In general, there are multiple reasons that can
explain why people choose self-medication over more conventional therapy, such as cost issues,
distrust in modern healthcare, or an interest in “green” medicine. But in the case of cannabis we
may add some less common reasons: a wide choice of chemical variety among cannabis strains,
unconventional administration forms, and even interest in the underlying cannabis subculture.
After all, a vast network of knowledge on cannabis exists, offering specialized magazines, extensive websites, and even international fairs and conferences. So despite the fact that cannabis and
modern medicine have an uneasy relationship with each other, it seems that the medicinal use of
cannabis is here to stay.

17.3 Defining self-medication
In the literature, self-medication generally refers to one of two behaviors: (1) the conscious use of
nonprescribed medication (over-the-counter drugs, alternative treatments, etc.) to treat a diagnosed or undiagnosed condition, or (2) the use of a (often illicit) drug to consciously or subconsciously treat a physical or psychological condition, as presented in Khantzian’s self-medication
hypothesis (Suh et al. 2008). While the former suggests a conscious effort to target a specific
disease state, the latter is often used as an explanation for the onset of a substance abuse disorder.
Both of these definitions of self-medication have relevance when discussing the medicinal use of
cannabis.
Self-medication is seen by some as a positive way to empower patients to take greater control
over their care, and to increase healthcare efficiency by reducing doctor visits. This has been a
justification for efforts to make some prescription medications for conditions such as diabetes,
asthma, migraines, and hypertension, available over the counter (Woodward et al. 2012). Some
countries that allow for medicinal use of cannabis simply require an “authorization” signed by
a physician to receive protection from legal penalties. The patients are essentially left to use the
cannabis on their own, assessing for themselves many of the treatment conditions that are normally assured by the formal healthcare infrastructure, such as the quality and/or reliability of the
source, proper dosage, routes of administration, and efficacy in disease progress. The “hands-off ”
approach to medicinal cannabis use that defines these programs offers self-medication as the only
option for participants. Evidence-based monitoring of the efficacy of cannabis on the indications
for which it is used, and even whether it is being used effectively and responsibly, is almost entirely
lacking. Greater inclusion of the physician in patients’ cannabis use, such as through an actual
prescription, could help to fill that gap in knowledge.
In contrast, in addiction psychology, self-medication may refer to recreational drug use that
results in unexpected or unacknowledged improvements to an existing condition. In this context,
this pattern of drug use may be the basis for a developing addiction (Hall and Queener 2007).
Additionally, studies have shown that medicinal use of cannabis is often related to the treatment
of a psychiatric condition (Lynch et al. 2006; Prentiss et al. 2004; Reinarman et al. 2011). As

321

322

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

cannabis is by far the most widely used illicit drug in Western cultures, some people may initially
use cannabis recreationally but then discover, consciously or subconsciously, an improvement of
psychiatric symptoms of a diagnosed or undiagnosed condition. If the initial intent of drug use is
not to treat a medical condition, but rather for other reasons (social acceptance, coping, etc.) then
the unsupervised use can eventually become problematic (Henwood and Padgett 2007).
“Self-medication” in both of these contexts elucidates the importance of an educated physician
being present and guiding patients in their medicinal use of cannabis, in order to determine the
most efficacious pattern of use, and avoid problems associated with overuse and/or addiction.
Because of the potentially fine line between proper self-medicating of a medical condition and
using cannabis in situations where it may do more harm than good, a better understanding of
the choices, preferences, and motivations of patients is a good starting point in our exploration of
self-medicating with cannabis (section 17.4).

17.4 Who and when: characterizing self-medicating patients
There are an estimated 119–224 million frequent users of cannabis worldwide (United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime 2012) but it is presently unclear how many of them could be considered, or consider themselves, as medicinal users. Research from Canada suggests that 1.6–1.8% of
the total population may be self-defined medical users, which could indicate a medical-use rate of
10% or more among the total cannabis-using population (Ogborne et al. 2000). Still, although a
lot may be learned from the experiences of actual medicinal users of cannabis, there are remarkably few data available on this topic. Currently, most information available on the effects of cannabis use comes from studies on the abuse of cannabis as a recreational drug. As a result, new
medical users and their physicians are often concerned about the risk of addiction, overdosing,
and intoxication (feeling “high”). But although such studies indeed focus on the same drug (cannabis), it is important to recognize there may be large differences between medicinal and recreational users, for example, in terms of the intention for use (see section 17.1), frequency and size of
dosing, and route of administration.
Randomized, placebo-controlled, and blinded clinical trials (RCTs) are the current gold standard for efficacy and safety, helping us to decide where and when the use of a medicinal substance
is medically appropriate. However, the therapeutic effects of herbal cannabis have been directly
compared to pharmaceutical products in only a few RCTs. Most of these studies compared an
unregistered oral cannabis extract (Cannador®) to Marinol® (Freeman et al. 2006; Killestein et al.
2002; Strasser et al. 2006; Zajicek et al. 2003, 2005), while a few others compared smoked cannabis to Marinol® (Haney et al. 2005,2007). Clearly, other approaches may be needed, at least in
the short term, to characterize self-medicating patients and better understand their choices and
preferences.
For this reason, the International Association for Cannabinoid Medicines (IACM) performed
a cross-sectional survey on the subjective preferences of patients for different administration
forms of cannabinoids, comparing self-medication to pharmaceutical products such as Marinol®,
Nabilone®, and Sativex®. Moreover, a recent evaluation of the Dutch medicinal cannabis program revealed a wealth of data on user characteristics in a more objective manner, by analyzing
prescriptions for cannabis dispensed by Dutch pharmacies over multiple years. Both studies are
discussed in the following sections (sections 17.4.1 and 17.4.2). Finally, the clinical data supporting the medicinal effects of cannabis may be limited, but they are certainly not absent. A short
overview is therefore given of the studies supporting some of the various claims made by patients
(section 17.4.3).

Self-Medication with Cannabis

17.4.1 IACM international survey

The IACM survey was able to capture the experiences and opinions of 953 patients, making
it the largest international study on users having experience with multiple cannabinoid-based
medicines (CBMs) performed so far (Hazekamp et al. 2013). Although the authors warn of the
limitations of self-selected participation, and point out a potential bias toward herbal cannabis,
the study indicated a strong preference of those surveyed for herbal cannabis products and the
inhaled route of administration, as opposed to oral pharmaceutical products.
On average, participants of the survey had experience with three to four different CBMs; were
current users who had a health professional involved in the management of their illness; and had
been using CBMs for at least several years. The average daily use, based on estimates by subjects,
ranged from 2.4 g for tea, and 3.0 g for smoking and for vapourizing, up to 3.4 g for edibles or tincture. The top five symptoms that subjects intended to treat with CBMs were chronic pain (29.2%
of participants), anxiety (18.3%), loss of appetite and/or weight (10.7%), depression (5.2%), and
insomnia or sleeping disorder (5.1%). Interestingly, there seemed to be no apparent correlation of
the preferred method of intake with the medical condition or symptoms under treatment. Several
other studies have identified the same symptoms, particularly chronic pain, as leading reasons
for using CBMs (Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse 2004; Clark 2004; Coomber et al. 2003;
Hathaway and Rossiter 2007; Lucas 2012; Ogborne et al. 2000). It should be noted that some studies focused on the ability of cannabis products to ameliorate symptoms, while others were more
concerned with the medical indications of those taking these products, which may somewhat
complicate the comparison of different studies.
When the survey compared the advantages of pharmaceutical products to herbal preparations
on many different aspects (side effects, onset and duration of effects, dosing, etc.), the latter were
preferred in most cases. Pharmaceutical products were preferred only for their “ease of preparation and intake,” although it should be noted that only a small number of surveyed subjects
reported actual experience with these products. Indeed, herbal cannabis products are generally
lacking convenient, reliable, and standardized administration forms, in contrast to conventional
medicines. It is clear that the obtained user characteristics are in stark contrast with conventional
medicine, which is mainly focused on prescribing oral single-compound drugs. Perhaps that is
why, according to the survey, home-growing of cannabis remained widely popular even among
those patients who had access to pharmaceutical cannabinoid drugs on prescription.
17.4.2 The Dutch medicinal cannabis program

The medicinal cannabis program of the Netherlands offers pharmaceutical-grade cannabis on
prescription to chronically ill patients (OMC 2013). Although patients are advised to administer
the product by using a vaporizer or by preparing it as a tea (Hazekamp et al. 2006, 2007), they
are essentially free to choose their own preferred method of intake. Presently, most Dutch health
insurance companies reimburse medicinal cannabis to some extent, and some now even cover the
Volcano Medic vaporizer for medical use (NCSM 2012).
A recent study by Hazekamp and Heerdink (2013), making use of the prescriptions database of
the Dutch Foundation for Pharmaceutical Statistics, was the first to use objective data to evaluate consumption patterns of prescribed cannabis use. Covering the period 2003–2010, the study
evaluated approximately 35,000 prescriptions for medicinal cannabis by Dutch physicians. Of the
5540 (anonymous) patients identified in the study, more females (56.8%) than males (42.7%) used
medicinal cannabis on prescription. The mean (median) age of the study population was 55.6 (55)
years, with a range of 14–93 years. The studied population received on average 6.4 prescriptions of

323

324

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

medicinal cannabis with a median of 10 g dispensed per prescription. Overall, medicinal cannabis
was prescribed for an average duration of 251 days. Interestingly, this contrasts with other studies
that found cannabis was used medicinally more commonly over a period of years and even over a
decade (Lucas 2012; Swift et al. 2005).
Although the route of administration could not be evaluated from the available prescription
data, the average daily use of 0.68 g was significantly lower than the 3–4 g found in the IACM
survey. These data point to a low potential of misuse, and a seeming absence of widespread
development of tolerance to cannabis prescribed by a physician. By comparison, an average
Dutch cannabis cigarette used for recreational purposes contains about 0.26 g of cannabis mixed
with tobacco (Van der Pol et al. 2013). Interestingly, the relative use of different cannabis varieties remained quite stable over the years 2007–2010: about 60% of prescriptions were for variety
Bedrocan®, with high THC (19%); 25% for Bedrobinol®, with lower THC (12%); and 15% for
Bediol®, containing both THC (6%) and CBD (7.5%).
By analyzing the medication prescribed in the period right before first onset of cannabis use,
the study was able to identify some medical indications correlated with cannabis use of the Dutch
patients. It was found that pain medication was used by 53.6% of all prescribed cannabis users.
Medication prescribed to treat nausea was used by 15.5% of all subjects. Although cancer, glaucoma, and HIV/AIDS are often mentioned in popular media in relation to medicinal cannabis
use, oncolytics (2.7%), eye pressure medication (2.2%), and HIV medication (0.9%) were only
used by a small proportion of subjects.
Because the study did not cover the entire Dutch general population, and a significant proportion of patients is believed to consume cannabis obtained from nonofficial sources, the calculated
prevalence rate of 5–8 per 100,000 should be considered a very conservative estimate. Prevalence
rates (unofficially) reported in some other countries where medicinal cannabis use is registered
by national authorities are 35 (per 100,000) for Canada and 80 for Israel, while in some US states
prevalence rates of well over 100 are claimed (IACM 2012). However, these numbers may be
significantly inflated with recreational users posing as medicinal users (Nussbaum et al. 2011).
17.4.3 Clinical research in support of herbal cannabis

Clinical studies with single cannabinoids (natural or synthetic) or whole plant preparations (e.g.,
smoked cannabis, encapsulated extract) have often been inspired by positive anecdotal experiences of patients using crude cannabis products for self-treatment. For example, the antiemetic,
appetite enhancing, analgesic, and muscle relaxant effects, and the therapeutic use of cannabinoids in Tourette’s syndrome, were all discovered or rediscovered in this manner (Hazekamp et al.
2010). This clearly speaks to the critical role that collecting data on current patient behaviors has
played—and may continue to play – in an evolving understanding of cannabis efficacy.
A comprehensive summary of clinical trials performed with cannabinoid-based medicines
was given by two complementary review papers (Ben Amar 2006; Hazekamp and Grotenhermen
2010). In the period from 1975–2009, at least 109 controlled clinical studies were published,
assessing well over 6500 patients suffering from a wide range of illnesses. Based on the data
available, it is possible to confirm that cannabinoids, also in the form of herbal cannabis, exhibit
a therapeutic potential mainly as analgesics in chronic neuropathic pain, as appetite stimulants
and antiemetics in debilitating diseases (e.g., cancer, AIDS, hepatitis C), and for the treatment
of various symptoms of multiple sclerosis. Additionally, cannabinoids may have potential in the
symptomatic treatment of spinal cord injuries, intestinal dysfunction, Tourette’s syndrome, hyperactivity and anxiety disorders, allergies, epilepsy, and glaucoma. Perhaps one of the most exciting

Self-Medication with Cannabis

recent findings is that cannabinoids may be effective in the treatment of some forms of cancer, by
not just ameliorating symptoms but actually attacking and killing cancer cells (Velasco et al. 2012).
Nowadays it is better understood that cannabis constituents other than the psychoactive
­Δ9-THC may play a role in therapeutic effects. Plant cannabinoids such as CBD and tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV), or the abundantly present terpenes, may influence the expected therapeutic effects in a myriad of ways, including synergy, enhancement of uptake or penetration of
the blood–brain barrier, and influencing receptor binding or metabolism (Izzo et al. 2009; Russo
2011). Unfortunately, such new insights are hardly reflected yet in our clinical understanding of
cannabis. Moreover, clinical trials typically focus on isolated cannabinoids given orally, while
self-medicating patients mainly use herbal cannabis in inhaled or edible forms. Those RCTs performed with cannabis often show significant limitations, including a limited choice of cannabis
varieties (restricted to a few official sources of research-grade cannabis worldwide), dosing range
(fear of overdosing), and administration form (smoking is strongly underpresented in clinical
data). In contrast, self-medicating patients can choose from an almost endless range of varieties,
from which they pick the optimal variety, dosing regimen, and administration form by a process
of trial and error.

17.5 Why: reasons for self-medication
Since the United Nations adopted the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs in 1961, cannabis
and its products have been defined as “narcotics with a high potential for abuse and no accepted
medicinal value.” This strict legal classification has effectively delayed their progression into
modern medicine, by not only keeping cannabis and cannabinoids out of the hands of medical
users, but also by depriving researchers of the materials needed for scientific investigation. But
despite its illegality, large numbers of patients have continued to push for the right to use cannabis,
including for self-medication. Patient-driven lawsuits against their governments have been the
basis for the availability of cannabis in Canada, Germany, and Finland, while voter initiatives have
resulted in the legalizing of medical marijuana use in multiple US states. Even in situations where
they have access to legal sources of herbal cannabis, patients frequently choose to grow their own
cannabis (Hazekamp et al. 2013). Besides the (perceived) superior efficacy of self-medication, we
will explore a few potential reasons why this may be the case in section 17.5.1.
17.5.1 Choice of varieties

As a result of extensive efforts in cannabis breeding and selection, an impressive range of cultivated varieties (cultivars, also known as strains) has been developed worldwide. These are commonly distinguished, by plant breeders, recreational users, and cannabis patients alike, through
the use of fascinating names such as White Widow, Northern Lights, Amnesia, or Haze. Already,
over 700 different varieties have been described (Snoeijer 2001) and many more are thought to
exist. An important reason for patients to keep purchasing materials from illicit markets is the fact
that, often by trial and error, they claim to have found particular strains that work optimally for
treatment of their specific symptoms.
In the context of self-medicating, an obvious question is how the chemical constituents found
in various cannabis cultivars reflect differential medicinal properties, and what types of cannabis
should consequently be made available to patients. In Canada, a recent review of the national
medical marijuana program indicated access to multiple cannabis varieties to be an important
issue for patients (Health Canada 2011). The most common way currently used to classify cannabis cultivars is through plant morphology (phenotype) with two main classes typically recognized:

325

326

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Cannabis sativa and Cannabis indica. Most modern cultivars are, however, genetically a blend of
both types. It is therefore unclear whether this classification reflects any relevant differences in
chemical composition.
Clearly, a better understanding of chemical differences between cannabis cultivars could help
bridge the gap between the vast knowledge on cannabis that exists within the community of recreational users, and the information needed by medicinal users and health professionals. However,
it is becoming increasingly clear that components in cannabis beyond Δ9-THC and CBD, such
as other minor plant-cannabinoids and volatile secondary metabolites called terpenoids, are
involved in the drug’s overall effect (Russo 2011). This high number of (potential) active components significantly complicates a conventional reductionist approach using analytical chemistry,
animal studies, and clinical trials, where typically a single active ingredient is identified before
further study is possible.
An alternative approach to this multiple component problem may be to simultaneously identify
and quantify all major components present in various cannabis types, and then use powerful statistical tools such as principal component analysis (PCA) to classify cultivars in a smaller number
of chemically distinct groups. With this approach it may be possible to move away from cannabis
cultivars, with often vague and unsubstantiated characteristics, toward a new classification using
chemovars with a complex, but nevertheless well-defined chemical “fingerprint.” This methodology has already been successfully applied to cannabis for differentiation of cultivars (Hazekamp
and Fischedick 2012) as well as quality control (Fischedick et al. 2010).
Using a comprehensive chemovar approach may help medicinal users and their physicians
to successfully switch from a beneficial cannabis variety obtained through illicit markets, to a
similar strain that is available through official state-run programs. It may also help these national
programs to narrow down the search for beneficial cannabis varieties to be standardized and
introduced as an official medicine. Exchange of cultivars and analytical data between the various
cannabis programs worldwide may greatly facilitate such a transition.
17.5.2 The role of the physician

Because physicians are the main gatekeepers to the legal and medically supervised use of cannabis, their role and attitudes deserve some further examination. With a rising interest in, and
media coverage of, medicinal use of cannabis, patients may turn toward self-medication when
their primary caregiver refuses to discuss the topic, or displays a clear lack of knowledge about it.
Unfortunately, physicians often do not see themselves properly equipped for their gatekeeper role.
A survey among US physicians regarding their attitudes toward legal prescription of cannabis as
medical therapy found that only one-third of surveyed US physicians thought cannabis might
have therapeutic value, versus nearly two-thirds of all Americans (Charuvastra et al. 2005). Safety
concerns included the harms associated with smoking, psychological dependence, and risks of
injury due to acute intoxication. Respondents made a clear call for more research to establish the
risks and benefits of cannabis use in specific patient populations.
Also a survey by the Canadian Medical Association (CMA) showed that physicians have major
concerns about the lack of rigorous research into the drug and about their own role prescribing it
(Sullivan 2012). Respondents mainly worried that patients who requested medical cannabis actually wanted it for recreational purposes, and that medical doctors did not have enough information on the risks and benefits or on the appropriate use of cannabis for medicinal purposes. The
CMA advised to improve scientific knowledge about cannabis, but also to develop compulsory
education and licensing programs for physicians based on the knowledge already available. A

Self-Medication with Cannabis

survey among family physicians in Colorado (Kondrad and Reid 2013), the state with the highest
recorded incidence of medicinal use of cannabis in the US, showed that most physicians believed
cannabis use, even medicinal, carries risks, and almost half said that physicians should not recommend marijuana as a medical therapy at all. But understanding that medicinal use was already a
reality in the state of Colorado, nearly all agreed on the need for further medical education and
formal training (e.g., though the continuing medical education (CME) system) before prescribing
or recommending it.
Since it is neither approved nor standardized according to Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) standards or their equivalent in other countries, physicians who recommend cannabis
ought to be especially scrupulous in their diagnosis and consequent recommendations. As a
result, physicians ask for clear, definitive guidelines for medicinal use, which should come from
the relevant authorities and medical associations in different countries. However, this requires
at least some understanding of self-medicating patients, including choice of varieties, administration forms, dosage, and the main medical conditions it is used for. Physicians have some
genuine concerns about self-medication with herbal cannabis, and it is important to make sure
that these concerns are heard. If unaddressed, the impact may be noticed as physician frustration or even avoidance of situations where their care is critical for patient health. The main goal
of these efforts should be to minimize diversion, misuse, and abuse potential while providing
adequate treatment to all those who have a legitimate need. Recent opinions released by various medical associations are a significant step in that direction (American Medical Association
2009; Sullivan 2012).
17.5.3 Social aspects of self-medication

A common link between those who use cannabis medicinally seems to be that they suffer from
conditions that are chronic and ongoing, and they are discontented with allopathic treatments
(Hathaway and Rossiter 2007). So although the discussion on self-medicating with cannabis is
primarily focused on therapeutic benefits versus pharmacological side effects, additional factors may be involved. A meta-analysis on the subjective effects of cannabis found that the most
frequently reported effects were: improved mood (i.e., feeling good, content), enhanced relaxation, increased insight into self and others, and improved perceptions (Green et al. 2003). This
indicates that establishing medical efficacy through clinical means alone overlooks a myriad of
psychosocial factors.
The right to medicate with cannabis, as a social justice issue, is one that increasing numbers of
North Americans and Europeans seem to support. However, employing mainly biomedical and
technical approaches, public health agencies have not historically learned to incorporate such
ideas and find it difficult to provide a clear answer to this development. Preconceived notions
about cannabis are ubiquitous, and definitions of cannabis as a natural herb remedy as opposed to
a synthetic pharmaceutical drug may also influence perceptions in favor of its use (Reiman 2008,
2009; Reinarman et al. 2011). As a result, those who self-medicate often do so on their own terms,
without government approval or the guidance of physicians. In this unregulated climate, compassion clubs, coffee shops, dispensaries, and other sorts of collectives have emerged outside the
law to play a vital role in the provision of safe access to, and therapeutic knowledge of, cannabis.
Operating on the margins of society, these outlets fulfil an important role in creating a community
among persons who are often highly marginalized themselves. Club membership may provide
group identity, empowerment, and restorative supports over and above the cannabis use itself
(Janichek and Reiman 2012).

327

328

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

In a study (Feldman and Mandel 1998) looking at the benefits of membership of “cannabis
buyers’ clubs” in the US, the authors concluded that such clubs were the soundest option—compared to doctors, pharmacists, police, and the black market—for providing access to cannabis as
medicine. They argue that the clubs afford the best therapeutic setting, a healing environment that
often offers an ethos of love, compassion, and emotional support in addition to health benefits
of cannabis itself. The same message was echoed in a study by Hathaway and Rossiter (2007),
where interviewed members contrasted their compassion clubs with treatments they received at
the hands of doctors, welfare agencies, employers, authorities, and government officials. A common theme recorded was that “chronic illness stigmatizes and subjects those who suffer to shame
and institutionalized abuse.” So perhaps the greatest strength of medicinal cannabis use is in the
holistic approach that cannot be found alongside the treatment with conventional drugs today.
Dispensaries can also help to decrease the gaps in substance education that many physicians
have left open (see section 17.5.2) and fulfil unmet clinical desires by providing an opportune
therapeutic setting to offer other services beneficial to patients. For example, in a study by Reiman
(2008), 66% of the patients surveyed reported to make use of the holistic services in San Francisco
Bay Area medical cannabis facilities including massage therapy, nutritional and herbal consultations, peer groups, and acupuncture. On the downside, few dispensaries currently offer clinical
services related to the potential downsides of cannabis use, such as substance misuse, dependence,
and mental health services (Janichek and Reiman 2012).
17.5.4 Costs and reimbursement

Because chronically ill patients, as a result of disability and unemployment, are often living on a
small budget, the reason for choosing to self-medicate may simply be related to the cost. Indeed,
when asked to rate ten different aspects of CBM use on a satisfaction scale ranging from 0–10, the
factor cost scored lowest overall, indicating that the cost involved with using cannabinoid-based
drugs, whether herbal or pharmaceutical, is a major issue for patients of all backgrounds. Of
course, this may not be surprising as most healthcare systems in the world do not (yet) provide
for reimbursement or health insurance coverage of CBMs.
The cost factor might have had substantial influence on available data on self-medication, as
it may be a reason for patients to grow their own cannabis, or to choose poorer-quality products
jeopardizing their health. Perhaps patients preferring herbal cannabis are simply those who need
a very high dose of cannabinoids, which cannot be covered by the currently available pharmaceutical cannabinoid preparations, both practically and economically. The US Institute of Medicine
already commented on this issue in 1999, stating that for patients without health insurance marijuana might be cheaper than an official source of Marinol® (Joy et al. 1999).
However, some promising changes are under way. In 2011, Sativex® was granted national reimbursement in Spain from the Spanish Ministry of Health (GW Pharmaceuticals 2011). And in the
Netherlands a recent survey showed that 11 out of 15 major Dutch health insurance companies
evaluated provided at least some form of reimbursement for medicinal cannabis (NCSM 2012). So
although the need for more clinical data remains, a fair and complete comparison on total costs
and benefits of different cannabinoids treatments may be another approach to this complex issue.

17.6 How: administration forms and quality control
The often cited report Marijuana and Medicine: Assessing the Science Base by the US Institute of
Medicine (Joy et al. 1999) pointed out the need for effective administration forms for cannabinoids, stating that scientific data indicate the potential therapeutic value of cannabinoid drugs,

Self-Medication with Cannabis

primarily Δ9-THC, for multiple indications, but that smoked cannabis is a crude cannabinoid
delivery system that also delivers harmful substances. The report concluded that what is needed
for optimal use of medicinal cannabinoids is a feasible, nonsmoked, rapid-onset delivery system.
Self-medication, almost by definition, is not driven by scientific insights, and may even actively
oppose opinions expressed by institutional scientists or by companies seen as “Big Pharma.” As
a result, it is possible that self-medicating patients have, by trial and error, discovered particular
cannabis varieties containing active components that only recently have attracted the interest of
scientists, such as CBD (http://www.projectCBD.org), THCV (Izzo et al. 2009), certain types of
terpenes (Hazekamp and Fischedick 2012), etc. And perhaps they simultaneously have discovered suitable administration forms for efficient delivery of these compounds. Indeed, multiple
unconventional administration forms have been developed by the self-medicating population,
including concentrated extracts known as cannabis oils, raw juiced buds, pot-brownies, and a
range of vaporizer devices.
Although these remedies are sometimes used by large groups of patients, there is virtually nothing in the published literature about them in terms of cannabinoid/terpene composition, presence
of contaminants, standardization of dose, or even their exact preparation methods. The following
sections will discuss some common administration forms, and comment on important quality
and safety aspects associated with them (sections 17.6.1–17.6.5).
17.6.1 The biochemistry of administration forms

Depending on the administration form, many changes to the original profile of compounds present in the fresh plant material may occur. A common, and often overlooked, function of most
administration forms of (herbal) cannabis is a heating step, which is essential for conversion of
the acidic cannabinoids into their, pharmacologically more active, neutral counterparts. If sufficient heat is applied, acidic cannabinoids such as THC-acid (THCA) and CBD-acid (CBDA) will
turn into their neutral counterparts by losing the unstable carboxylic acid group. When cannabis
is burned for smoking, baked for cookies, or boiled for tea, nonpsychoactive THCA turns into
­Δ9-THC, CBDA turns into CBD, and so forth for all other cannabinoids. This conversion process,
known as decarboxylation, also spontaneously takes place in aging cannabis samples, although at
a much slower rate (Veress et al. 1990).
Besides the extent of decarboxylation, other aspects related to administration form may have a
significant impact on therapeutic effects. For example, overheating, as well as exposure to light or
air, may lead to the formation of degradation products such as cannabinol (CBN) and Δ8-THC,
with potential pharmacological properties of their own (Izzo et al. 2009). Fragile components
such as the terpenes may get lost by evaporation as a result of long-term storage, or preparation
methods that apply heat before consumption (e.g., boiling for tea, evaporating solvents for making extracts). Moreover, each administration form comes with its own set of specific metabolites
formed upon consumption. As a result of all these factors combined, a different spectrum of
compounds is finally entering the bloodstream, and consequently a different type and duration of
effects may be observed for each cannabis medicine. The following sections (17.6.2–17.6.5) give a
short overview of considerations related to the most common administration forms.
17.6.2 The inhaled route: smoking and vaporizing

Worldwide, smoking is by far the most commonly used method of consuming cannabis. The few
studies that have directly compared the two forms of THC delivery show smoking to be comparable (Haney et al. 2005, 2007) or more effective (Chang et al. 1979; Hepler and Petrus 1976;

329

330

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Vinciguerra et al. 1988) in achieving adequate blood concentrations than oral administration.
Inhaling is about equal in efficiency to intravenous injection, while considerably more practical (Agurell et al. 1986; Ohlsson et al. 1980). A dose of 2–5 mg of Δ9-THC consumed through
smoking reliably produces blood concentrations above the effective level within a few minutes
(Mattes et al. 1994; Wall and Perez-Reyes 1981). As a result, cannabis smoking is generally appreciated by self-medicating patients as a convenient method of administration, allowing accurate
self-titration of the desired effects (Hazekamp et al. 2013), although many therapeutic studies
using smoked or vaporized administration of cannabis reported at least some psychoactivity as a
side effect (Hazekamp and Grotenhermen 2010). Although use of tobacco should obviously not
be encouraged, it may be relevant to further study whether the addition of tobacco to cannabis
cigarettes is merely a matter of taste or habit, or has an actual therapeutic function in combination
with cannabis. At least one study has suggested that the presence of tobacco releases relatively
more THC from cannabis when smoked (Van der Kooy et al. 2009).
Despite the absence of a clear association between cannabis use and lung cancer in clinical epidemiological studies (Aldington et al. 2008; Hashibe et al. 2006), inhalation of toxic compounds
during cannabis smoking can pose serious health hazards (Mehra et al. 2006), probably even more
so for chronically ill and weakened patients. This risk is not thought to be due to cannabinoids,
but rather to noxious pyrolytic by-products such as tar, carbon monoxide, and ammonia (Hiller
et al. 1984; Matthias et al. 1997). Consequently, the shortcomings of smoked cannabis have been
widely viewed as a major obstacle for approval of crude (herbal) cannabis as a medicine by public
health authorities (Joy et al. 1999).
Cannabis vaporization, or volatilization, is a technique aimed at suppressing irritating respiratory toxins by heating cannabis to a temperature where active cannabinoid vapors are formed, but
below the point of combustion where pyrolytic toxic compounds are released. Vaporization offers
the advantages of the pulmonary route of administration, i.e., rapid delivery into the bloodstream,
ease of self-titration and concomitant minimization of the risk of over- and underdosing, while
avoiding the respiratory disadvantages of smoking. Several studies have been performed in recent
years showing that vaporizing can be considered an efficient way of cannabinoid administration (Hazekamp et al. 2006; Zuurman et al. 2008) with a bioavailability comparable to smoking
(Abrams et al. 2007). Because of the temperatures used for vaporizing (typically in the range of
180–210°C), the whole range of terpenes present in herbal cannabis is efficiently inhaled, maximizing therapeutic potential.
17.6.3 The oral route: tea and edibles

Herbal cannabis can be consumed in the form of a decoction, also referred to as “cannabis tea.”
Although only a few standardized studies have been performed with tea preparations of cannabis
(De Jong et al. 2005; Hazekamp et al. 2007; Steinagle and Upfal 1999), cannabis tea was found to
be a relatively popular method of intake among patients who reported to have experience with
the oral use of cannabis medicine (Hazekamp et al. 2013). Main advantages associated with its use
included its relatively long duration of effects, and low occurrence of side effects.
Actual methods used for cannabis tea preparation by patients are largely unknown, and many
variations may exist. In the Netherlands, patients are advised to prepare cannabis tea by adding
1.0 g of cannabis to 1 L of boiling water, letting it simmer for 15 min, and finally filtering out solid
parts by using a wire-mesh tea-strainer (OMC 2013). Despite the fact that cannabinoids are notoriously insoluble in water (Hazekamp and Verpoorte 2006) it was found that cannabis tea prepared
in this way yielded significant amounts of cannabinoids in a reproducible manner (Hazekamp

Self-Medication with Cannabis

et al. 2007). Considerably more THCA than Δ9-THC (ratio about 5:1) was detected, which may be
explained by the relatively higher water solubility of THCA compared to Δ9-THC, combined with
a relatively slow decarboxylation rate of acidic cannabinoids in boiling water (Hazekamp et al.
2007). In addition, several other cannabinoids were found in their acidic form, including cannabigerolic acid (CBGA) and tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid (THVA). This may be of particular
interest, as most other administration forms are largely devoid of acidic cannabinoids. Although
in general not much is known about biological activities of acidic cannabinoids, CBDA was
reported to have a potent antimicrobial activity (Leizer et al. 2000) and to show promising antiinflammatory effects (Takeda et al. 2008), while THCA was found to have a considerable effect on
the human immune system (Verhoeckx et al. 2006).
Self-medication with cannabis in ingested form, such as cookies, brownies, or candies, seems to
be particularly popular among North American patients (75.6% of survey participants; Hazekamp
2013) compared to other nationalities (46.5% of survey participants). As far as we know, there
currently are no validated methods available for the analysis of cannabinoids and/or terpenes
in edibles containing herbal cannabis or extracts. Indeed, preparing a neat analytical sample
suitable for chromatographic analysis may be challenging in the presence of ingredients such as
butter, flour, sugars, etc. As a result, no published data seem to be available on the composition
or consistency of edibles. Theoretically, issues that are likely to occur with such products include
homogenization (ensuring one cookie has the same potency as the next), consistent decarboxylation (a large brownie is baked longer than a smaller one), and shelf-life stability. Consequently, the
use of standardized recipes and procedures may be even more important for edibles than for any
other administration form discussed here.
17.6.4 New kids on the block: tinctures, concentrates, and raw juice

According to the IACM survey discussed in section 17.4.1, the most common issues regarding
CBMs that patients are concerned with included bad taste, drowsiness, uncontrollable appetite
(munchies), and mental effects (getting high). It was also suggested that different administration
forms may be preferred in the privacy of one’s home and in public (Hazekamp et al. 2013). In order
to address such issues, self-medicating patients frequently experiment with new administration
forms, some of which may then gather significant popularity. Not surprisingly, most of these new
and unconventional administration forms have never been tested for any form of quality or safety.
When patients were asked what new cannabis-based product should be made legally available
(besides herbal cannabis itself), tincture based on whole cannabis was found to be the most popular choice (Hazekamp et al. 2013). The main advantage cited was the variability of its use: as oral
drops, in baked goods and in tea, and even for vaporizing or smoking, allowing for maximal flexibility of using cannabinoids throughout the day. Indeed, a standardized and quality-controlled
cannabis tincture would be relatively easy to produce, and would connect the modern use of cannabis directly to the historical use of tinctures as described in older pharmacopoeia (Zuardi 2006).
In order to “activate” the acidic cannabinoids, the tincture, or the plant material used to prepare
it, should be heated at some point of the preparation process.
Cannabis oil is a concentrated extract obtained by solvent extraction of the buds or leaves of
the cannabis plant, deriving its name from its sticky and viscous appearance. Various nonpolar
solvents have been recommended for this purpose, including petroleum ether, naphtha, alcohol,
and olive oil. The most well-known cannabis oil preparation is also known as “Rick Simpson” oil
(Simpson 2008, 2013). Part of the self-medicating population firmly believes that these products
are capable of curing cancer, a claim that is backed up by numerous anecdotal patient stories.

331

332

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

However, a recent study comparing five commonly used preparation methods found significant
differences in cannabinoid and terpene composition of the resulting extracts. Also, the presence
of residual solvent was found to be a significant concern, particularly in the case of using naphtha
as the extraction solvent. The final conclusion of the study was to prepare extracts directly in
olive oil, heated in a boiling water bath, for highest recovery of active compounds, and no risk of
organic solvent residues (Romano and Hazekamp 2013).
Finally, the use of raw cannabis buds and leaves, prepared by juicing them in a blender with
water or fruit juice, or by eating them directly as a salad, deserves some attention. The claimed,
but unsubstantiated, therapeutic effects of these products include prevention of seizures, diabetes,
and even curing brain tumors in infants (Cannabis International 2013). Different from the other
administration forms mentioned earlier, this preparation does not undergo any form of heating,
and therefore contains all cannabinoids in their native (acidic) form (Lee 2013).
17.6.5 Quality and safety

Because the intention of self-medication products is often to treat seriously ill, or even
immune-compromised, patients, issues regarding chemical composition, quality, and safety
should be of the highest priority. In the absence of clear guidelines for preparation or chemical characterization, medicinal users of cannabis may inadvertently purchase a product that
has unexpected effects on their health and/or psyche. Changes in chemical composition may
not only be derived from genetic differences between cannabis varieties, but could also be
caused by variations in, for example, cultivation conditions, drying, processing, and storage. These factors may differ between different suppliers (coffee shop, dispensary, compassion club), and even between different batches of the same cannabis strain (Hazekamp and
Fischedick 2012).
For conventional medicines, independent and certified quality control labs play a key role
in ensuring quality and safety by performing a detailed analysis of the composition of these
products. In the national cannabis programs of Canada and the Netherlands, products are
independently tested for general appearance (i.e., color, bud shape, etc.), cannabinoid profile,
terpene profile (the Netherlands only), and water content. Furthermore, the absence of heavy
metals, pesticides, bacteria, molds, and fungal toxins is established. Because self-administration of cannabis most often takes place outside the realm of legal medicine, certified labs are
wary of getting involved in the analysis of anything cannabis related. By necessity, this void is
then often filled by unregulated labs that are set up from within the cannabis community, most
notably in the US and Canada. However, cannabis is a complex phytomedicine with a wide
profile of (potential) bioactive components, which may change in many ways depending on the
administration form chosen (as discussed earlier in sections 17.6.1–17.6.4). As a result, each
type of administration form needs its own properly validated methods for chemical analysis.
Because these tests are costly, they are only affordable in the case of large batch sizes. As a
result, smaller production sites may have an inherent problem with quality control. All these
factors complicate the setting up of a reliable system for quality control, as was recently shown
by a comparative test among ten different California-based labs (Gieringer and Hazekamp
2011).
Apart from THC overdosing, multiple case-studies have identified the consumption of unsafe
cannabis as the cause for hospitalization, or even death. Among others, cannabis products were
found to contain fungal spores of, e.g., Aspergillus or Penicillium species, or harmful bacteria
such as E. coli (Hazekamp et al. 2006; McLaren et al. 2008), lead particles for added weight

Self-Medication with Cannabis

(cannabis is sold by weight) (Busse et al. 2008), or ground-up glass or talcum to mimic the presence of glandular hairs (“crystals”) thereby suggesting higher potency (Scheel et al. 2012; Van
Amsterdam et al. 2007). In the case of pesticides it is unclear which, if any, pose a threat to the
health of consumers. As yet, no studies have been conducted on the safety of pesticides as applied
to inhaled or ingested cannabis. Pesticides with known chemistry may be altered, destroyed, or
rendered more or less toxic in the process of combustion or cooking. Although this may not be a
major concern for recreational users who mainly seek intoxication by their own free will, patients
cannot afford to be exposed to such risks. Cannabis products from a standardized and qualitycontrolled source, if available, may therefore be the safer choice for medicinal users preferring
self-medication with herbal cannabis.

17.7 Conclusion
Self-medication with cannabis seems to be prominent currently, and rising in popularity. The
emerging interest in studying this phenomenon has already provided important insight into
several aspects regarding the medicinal use of cannabis that patients find effective and desirable.
Such data are important in finding how to increase positive health outcomes regarding cannabis
use, by bringing it progressively into the realm of modern medicine. Ultimately, as official and
federally regulated medicinal cannabis programs continue to increase in prevalence and size,
those who have been pushed into self-medication linked with the illicit market may get the opportunity to bring their medicinal use into the scope of a regular patient–physician relationship. In
the ideal setting, physicians should have the information at hand to offer the same care with cannabis as they do with other pharmaceutical preparations. Self-medication with cannabis may then
become strictly a matter of choice, rather than necessity.

References
Abrams, D.I., Vizoso, H.P., Shade, S.B., Jay, C., Kelly, M.E., and Benowitz, N.L. (2007). Vaporization
as a smokeless cannabis delivery system: a pilot study. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 82(5),
572–578.
Agurell, S., Halldin, M., Lindgren, J.E., et al. (1986). Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of delta-1-­
tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids with emphasis on man. Pharmacological Reviews, 38,
21–43.
Aldington, S., Harwood, M., Cox, B., et al. Cannabis and Respiratory Disease Research Group (2008).
Cannabis use and risk of lung cancer: a case-control study. European Respiratory Journal, 31, 280–286.
American Medical Association. (2009). Report 3 of the Council on Science and Public Health (I-09) – Use of
Cannabis for Medicinal Purposes. [Online] Available at: http://www.ama-assn.org/resources/doc/csaph/
csaph-report3-i09.pdf (accessed April 4, 2013).
Americans for Safe Access. (2012). Connecticut Becomes 17th Medical Marijuana State in the Face
of Ongoing Federal Intimidation. [Online] Press release of June 1 2012. Available at: http://www.­
safeaccessnow.org/connecticut_becomes_17th_medical_marijuana_state_in_the_face_of_ongoing_­
federal_intimidation (accessed April 4, 2013).
Ben Amar, M. (2006). Cannabinoids in medicine: a review of their therapeutic potential. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology, 105(1–2), 1–25.
Busse, F., Omidi, L., Leichtle, A., Windgassen, M., Kluge, E., and Stumvoll, M. (2008). Lead poisoning
due to adulterated marijuana. New England Journal of Medicine, 358, 1641–1642.
Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse. (2004). Canadian Addiction Survey 2004. [Online] Ottawa: Canadian
Centre on Substance Abuse. Available at: http://www.ccsa.ca/Eng/Priorities/Research/CanadianAddiction/
Pages/CanadianAddictionSurveyReleaseofMicrodataFiles.aspx (accessed April 4, 2013).

333

334

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Cannabis International. (2013). Official website of Dr. Courtney. [Online] Available at: http://www.­
cannabisinternational.org (accessed April 4, 2013).
Chang, A.E., Shiling, D.J., Stillman, R.C., et al. (1979). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as an antiemetic
in cancer patients receiving high dose methotrexate: a prospective randomized evaluation. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 91, 819–824.
Charuvastra, A., Friedmann, P.D., and Stein, M.D. (2005). Physician attitudes regarding the prescription
of medical marijuana. Journal of Addictive Diseases, 24(3), 87–93.
Clark, A.J., Ware, M.A., Yazer, E., Murray, T.J., and Lynch, M.E. (2004). Patterns of cannabis use among
patients with multiple sclerosis. Neurology, 62(11), 2098–2100.
Coomber, R., Oliver, M., and Morris, C. (2003). Using cannabis therapeutically in the UK: a qualitative
analysis. Journal of Drug Issues, 33(2), 325–356.
De Jong, F.A., Engels, F.E., Sparreboom, A., et al. (2005). Influence of medicinal cannabis (MC) on the
pharmacokinetics (PK) of docetaxel (DOC) andirinotecan (CPT-11). Proceedings of the American
Association for Cancer Research, 46, 938c–939c.
Feldman, H.W. and Mandel, R.J. (1998). Providing medical marijuana: the importance of cannabis clubs.
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 30, 179–186.
Fischedick, J.T., Hazekamp, A., Erkelens, T., Choi, Y.H., and Verpoorte, R. (2010). Metabolic fingerprinting of Cannabis sativa L., cannabinoids and terpenoids for chemotaxonomic and drug standardization
purposes. Phytochemistry, 71(17–18), 2058–2073.
Freeman, R.M., Adekanmi, O., Waterfield, M.R., Waterfield, A.E., Wright, D., and Zajicek, J. (2006).
The effect of cannabis on urge incontinence in patients with multiple sclerosis: a multicentre, randomised placebo-controlled trial (CAMS-LUTS). International Urogynecology Journal and Pelvic Floor
Dysfunction, 17(6), 636–641.
Gieringer, D. and Hazekamp, A. (2011). How accurate is potency testing? O’Shaughnessy’s, 17. Autumn
issue. [Online] Available at: http://www.projectcbd.org/news/the-ring-test-oshaughnessys/ (accessed
April 4, 2013).
Green, B., Kavanagh, D., and Young, R. (2003). Being stoned: a review of self-reported cannabis effects.
Drug and Alcohol Review, 22(4), 453–460.
GW Pharmaceuticals. (2011). Sativex Granted National Reimbursement in Spain. [Press release, February 17]
[Online] Available at: http://www.gwpharm.com/Sativex%20granted%20reimbursement%20in%20Spain.
aspx (accessed April 4, 2013).
Hall, D.H. and Queener, J.E. (2007). Self-medication hypothesis of substance use: testing Khantzian’s
updated theory. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 39(2), 151–158.
Haney, M., Gunderson, E.W., Rabkin, J., et al. (2007). Dronabinol and marijuana in HIV-positive marijuana smokers. Caloric intake, mood, and sleep. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes,
45(5), 545–554.
Haney, M., Rabkin, J., Gunderson, E., and Foltin, R.W. (2005). Dronabinol and marijuana in HIV(+)
marijuana smokers: acute effects on caloric intake and mood. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 181(1),
170–178.
Hashibe, M., Morgenstern, H., Cui, Y., et al. (2006). Marijuana use and the risk of lung and upper aerodigestive tract cancers: results of a population-based case-control study. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers
and Prevention, 15, 1829–1834.
Hathaway, A.D. and Rossiter, K. (2007). Medical marijuana, community building, and Canada’s compassionate societies. Contemporary Justice Review, 10(3), 283–296.
Hazekamp, A., Bastola, K., Rashidi, H., Bender, J., and Verpoorte, R. (2007). Cannabis tea revisited: a
systematic evaluation of the cannabinoid composition of cannabis tea. Journal of Ethnopharmacology,
113, 85–90.

Self-Medication with Cannabis

Hazekamp, A. and Fischedick, J.T. (2012). Cannabis – from cultivar to chemovar. Towards a better definition of cannabis potency. Drug Testing and Analysis, 4, 660–667.
Hazekamp, A., Fischedick, J.T., Diez, M.L., Lubbe, A., and Ruhaak, R.L. (2010). Chemistry of cannabis.
In: L. Mander and H.-W. Lui (eds.). Comprehensive Natural Products II Chemistry and Biology. Vol.
No. 3. Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 1033–1084.
Hazekamp, A. and Grotenhermen, F. (2010). Review on clinical studies with cannabis and cannabinoids
2005-2009. Cannabinoids, 5(special issue), 1–21.
Hazekamp, A. and Heerdink, E.R. (2013). The prevalence and incidence of medicinal cannabis on prescription in the Netherlands. European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 69, 1575–1580.
Hazekamp, A., Ruhaak, R., Zuurman, L., van Gerven, J., and Verpoorte, R. (2006). Evaluation of a vaporizing device (Volcano ) for the pulmonary delivery of tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, 95(6), 1308–1317.
Hazekamp, A. and Verpoorte, R. (2006). Structure elucidation of the tetrahydrocannabinol complex with
randomly methylated-beta-cyclodextrin. European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 29(5), 340–347.
Hazekamp, A., Ware, M.A., Muller-Vahl, K.R., Abrams, D., and Grotenhermen, F. (2013) The medicinal
use of cannabis and cannabinoids; an international cross-sectional survey on administration forms.
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 45, 199–210.
Health Canada. (2011). Medical Use of Marihuana; Latest Updates. [Online] Available at: http://www.hc-sc.
gc.ca/dhp-mps/marihuana/index-eng.php (accessed April 4, 2013).
Henwood, B. and Padgett, D.K. (2007). Reevaluating the self-medication hypothesis among the dually
diagnosed. The American Journal on Addictions, 16(3), 160–165.
Hepler, R.S. and Petrus, R. (1976). Experiences with administration of marijuana to glaucoma patients. In:
S. Cohen and R. Stillman (eds.). The Therapeutic Potential of Marihuana. New York: Plenum Medical
Book Company, pp. 63–76.
Hiller, F.C., Wilson, F.J.J., Mazumder, M.K., Wilson, J.D., and Bone, R.C. (1984). Concentration and
particle size distribution in smoke from marijuana cigarettes with different delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol
content. Fundamental and Applied Toxicology, 4, 451–454.
IACM (International Association for Cannabinoid Medicine). (2012). Increasing numbers of patients use
cannabis for medicinal purposes. [Online] Electronic newsletter of 08 April 2012. Available at: http://
blog.norml.org/2012/04/11/estimate-worldwide-population-of-lawful-medical-marijuana-patients/
(accessed April 4, 2013).
Izzo, A.A., Borrelli, F., Capasso, R., Di Marzo, V., and Mechoulam, R. (2009). Non-psychotropic plant
cannabinoids: new therapeutic opportunities from an ancient herb. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences,
30(10), 515–527.
Janichek, J.L. and Reiman, A. (2012). Clinical service desires of medical cannabis patients. Harm Reduction
Journal, 9, 12–17.
Joy, J.E., Watson, S.J., and Benson, J.A. (eds.). (1999) Marijuana and Medicine: Assessing the Science Base.
Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press.
Killestein, J., Hoogervorst, E.L.J., Reif, M., et al. (2002). Safety, tolerability, and efficacy of orally administered cannabinoids in MS. Neurology, 58(9), 1404–1407.
Kondrad, E. and Reid, A. (2013). Colorado family physicians’ attitudes toward medical marijuana. Journal
of the American Board of Family Medicine, 26(1), 52–60.
Lee, M.A. (2013). Juicing raw cannabis. O’Shaughnessy’s, 27. Winter/Spring issue. [Online] Available at:
http://www.beyondthc.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/Juicing-33.pdf (accessed April 4, 2013).
Leizer, C., Ribnicky, D., Poulev, A., Dushenkov, S., and Raskin, I. (2000). The composition of hemp seed
oil and its potential as an important source of nutrition. Journal of Nutraceuticals, Functional & Medical
Foods, 2(4), 35–53.

®

335

336

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Lucas, P. (2012). It can’t hurt to ask; a patient-centered quality of service assessment of Health Canada’s
medical cannabis policy and program. Harm Reduction Journal, 9, 2.
Lynch, M., Young, J., and Clark, A.J. (2006). A case series of patients using medicinal marihuana for management of chronic pain under the Canadian marihuana medical access regulations. Journal of Pain and
Symptom Management, 32(5), 497–501.
Mattes, R.D., Engelman, K., Shaw, L.M., and Elsohly, M.A. (1994). Cannabinoids and appetite stimulation. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 49, 187–195.
Matthias, P., Tashkin, D.P., Marques-Magallanes, J.A., Wilkins, J.N., and Simmons, M.S. (1997). Effects
of varying marijuana potency on deposition of tar and delta9-THC in the lung during smoking.
Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behaviour, 58, 1145–1150.
McLaren, J., Swift, W., Dillon, P., and Allsop, S. (2008). Cannabis potency and contamination: a review of
the literature. Addiction, 103, 1100–1109.
Mehra, R., Moore, B.A., Crothers, K., Tetrault, J., and Fiellin, D.A. (2006). The association between marijuana smoking and lung cancer: a systematic review. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166, 1359–1367.
Micale, V., Di Marzo, V., Sulcova, A., Wotjak, C.T., and Drago, F. (2013). Endocannabinoid system and
mood disorders: priming a target for new therapies. Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 138(1), 18–37.
NCSM (Dutch foundation for legal cannabis and its constituents as medicine). (2012). Survey Among Major
Health Insurance Companies [In Dutch]. [Online] Available at: http://www.ncsm.nl/cfsystem/userData/
pdf/1358352476__document__ncsm-vergoeding-medicinale-cannabis-2012.doc.pdf (accessed April 4,
2013).
Nussbaum, A.M., Boyer, J.A., and Kondrad, E.C. (2011). “But my doctor recommended pot”: medical marijuana and the patient-physician relationship. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 26(11), 1364–1367.
Nutt, D., King, L.A., Saulsbury, W., and Blakemore, C. (2007). Development of a rational scale to assess
the harm of drugs of potential misuse. Lancet, 369(9566), 1047–1053.
Ogborne, A.C., Smart, R.G., Weber, T., and Birchmore-Timney, C. (2000). Who is using cannabis as a
medicine and why: an exploratory study. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 32, 435–443.
Ohlsson, A., Lindgren, J.E., A Wahlen,A., Agurell, S., Hollister, L.E., and Gillespie, H.K. (1980). Plasma
delta-9-THC concentrations and clinical effects after oral and intravenous administrations and smoking. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 28, 409–416.
OMC (Office of Medicinal Cannabis). (2013). Department of Health, official website. [Online] Available at:
http://www.cannabisbureau.nl (accessed April 4, 2013).
Passie, T., Emrich, H.M., Karst, M., Brandt, S.D., and Halpern, J.H. (2012). Mitigation of post-traumatic
stress symptoms by Cannabis resin: a review of the clinical and neurobiological evidence. Drug Testing
& Analysis, 4(7–8), 649–659.
Prentiss, D., Power, R., Balmas, G., Tzuang, G., and Israelski, D.M. (2004). Patterns of marijuana use
among patients with HIV/AIDS followed in a public health care setting. Journal of Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndromes, 35(1), 38–45.
Reiman, A.E. (2008). Self-efficacy, social support and service integration at medical cannabis facilities in
the San Francisco Bay Area of California. Health & Social Care in the Community, 16(1), 31–41.
Reiman, A.E. (2009). Cannabis as a substitute for alcohol and other drugs. Harm Reduction Journal, 6, 35.
Reinarman, C., Nunberg, H., Lanthier, F., and Heddleston, T. (2011). Who are medical marijuana
patients? Population characteristics from nine California assessment clinics. Journal of Psychoactive
Drugs, 43(2), 128–135.
Romano, L.L. and Hazekamp, A. (2013). Cannabis oil, chemical evaluation of an upcoming cannabis-based
medicine. Cannabinoids, 1(1), 1–11.
Russo, E.B. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage
effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1344–1364.

Self-Medication with Cannabis

Scheel, A.H., Krause, D., Haars, H., Schmitz, I., and Junker, K. (2012). Talcum induced pneumoconiosis
following inhalation of adulterated marijuana, a case report. Diagnostic Pathology, 7, 26.
Simpson, R. (2008). Run from the Cure. [Documentary film] [Online] Available at: http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=0psJhQHk_GI (accessed April 4, 2013).
Simpson, R. (2013). Rick Simpson official website. [Online] Available at: http://phoenixtears.ca/ (accessed
April 4, 2013).
Snoeijer, W. (2001). A Checklist of Some Cannabaceae Cultivars. Part 1: Cannabis. Leiden: Div.
Pharmacognosy, Leiden/Amsterdam Centre for Drug Research.
Steinagle, G.C. and Upfal, M. (1999). Concentration of marijuana metabolites in the urine after ingestion
of hemp seed tea. Journal of Occupational & Environmental Medicine, 41, 510–513.
Strasser, F., Luftner, D., Possinger, K., et al. (2006). Comparison of orally administered cannabis extract
and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in treating patients with cancer-related anorexia-cachexia syndrome:
a multicenter, phase III, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial from the CannabisIn-Cachexia-Study-Group. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 24(21), 3394–3400.
Suh, J.J., Ruffins, S., Robins, C.E., Albanese, M.J., and Khantzian, E.J. (2008). Self-medication hypothesis
– connecting affective experience and drug choice. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 25(3), 518–532.
Sullivan, P. (2012). MD Role in Use of Medical Marijuana Baffles Many Doctors: Survey. [Online] [Canadian
Medical Association, news item released on October 11, 2012.] Available at: http://www.cma.ca/mdrole-medical-marijuana-baffles (accessed April 4, 2013).
Swift, W., Gates, P., and Dillon, P. (2005). Survey of Australians using cannabis for medical purposes.
Harm Reduction Journal, 2, 18.
Takeda, S., Misawa, K., Yamamoto, I., and Watanabe, K. (2008). Cannabidiolic acid as a selective
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitory component in cannabis. Drug Metabolism and Disposition, 36(9), 1917–1921.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. (2012). World Drug Report. New York: United Nations
Publishing.
Van Amsterdam, J.G.C., Van Marle, J., Van Dijk, P., Niesink, R., and Opperhuizen, A. (2007).
Electronenmicroscopisch onderzoek van vervuilde wietmonsters [Electron-microscopic evaluation of polluted cannabis samples; study in Dutch]. Bilthoven: RIVM (Dutch National Institute for Health and the
Environment).
Van der Kooy, F., Pomahacova, B., and Verpoorte, R. (2009). Cannabis smoke condensate II: influence of
tobacco on tetrahydrocannabinol levels. Inhalation Toxicology, 21(2), 87–90.
Van der Pol, P., Liebregts, N., De Graaf, R., Korf, D.J., Van den Brink, W., and Van Laar, M. (2013).
Validation of self-reported cannabis dose and potency: an ecological study. Addiction, 108(10),
1801–1808.
Velasco, G., Sánchez, C., and Guzmán, M. (2012). Towards the use of cannabinoids as antitumour agents.
Nature Reviews Cancer, 12(6), 436–444.
Veress, T., Szanto, J.I., and Leisztner, L. (1990). Determination of cannabinoid acids by high-performance
liquid chromatography of their neutral derivatives formed by thermal decarboxylation in an open reactor. Journal of Chromatography, 520, 339–347.
Verhoeckx, K.C., Korthout, H.A., Van Meeteren-Kreikamp, A.P., et al. (2006). Unheated Cannabis
sativa extracts and its major compound THC-acid have potential immuno-modulating properties
not mediated by CB1 and CB2 receptor coupled pathways. International Immunopharmacology, 6(4),
656–665.
Vinciguerra, V., Moore, T., and Brennan, E. (1988). Inhalation of marijuana as an antiemetic for cancer
chemotherapy. New York State Journal of Medicine, 85, 525–527.
Wall, M.E. and Perez-Reyes, M. (1981). The metabolism of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and related cannabinoids in man. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 178S–189S.

337

338

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Ware, M. (2012). Moving ahead on the medical use of cannabis. [Online] Opinion paper sent to the
Montreal Gazette. December 18, 2012. Available at: http://www.montrealgazette.com/Opinion+Moving
+ahead+medical+cannabis/7710533/story.html#ixzz2GvABWL00 (accessed April 4, 2013).
Woodward, C. (2012). A move toward self-medication in the United States. Canadian Medical Association
Journal, 184(10), 1130–1131.
Zajicek, J., Fox, P., Sanders, H., et al. (2003). Cannabinoids for treatment of spasticity and other symptoms
related to multiple sclerosis (CAMS study): multicentre randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet,
362(9395), 1517–1526.
Zajicek, J.P., Sanders, H.P., Wright, D.E., et al. (2005). Cannabinoids in multiple sclerosis (CAMS) study:
safety and efficacy data for 12 months follow up. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry,
76(12), 1664–1669.
Zuardi, A.W. (2006). History of cannabis as a medicine: a review. Revista Brasileira De Psiquiatria, 28(2),
153–157.
Zuurman, L., Roy, C., Schoemaker, R., et al. (2008). Effect of intrapulmonary THC administration in
humans. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 22(7), 707–716.

Chapter 18

Cannabis Distribution: Coffee Shops
to Dispensaries
Amanda Reiman

18.1 Introduction
The formal distribution of non-medical cannabis is only allowed in one nation, Uruguay. However,
through policy loopholes and the increasing allowance of cannabis for medical purposes, cannabis distribution centers exist. Their existence most often takes the form of a coffee shop in the
Netherlands, or a medical cannabis dispensary in the US and Canada. Coffee shops, often touted as a
tourist attraction, assist in the separation of drug markets in the Netherlands (MacCoun and Reuter
2001), while dispensaries, collectives, or compassion centers as they are sometimes called, require
proper documents from a physician to gain entry. Regardless of the context, the distribution of cannabis is a contentious issue, mostly due to assumptions about criminal activity and potential threats
to the surrounding community, even though these fears have not been supported by research (Kepple
and Freisthler 2012; Kintz 2010). This chapter will review the history of cannabis distribution through
coffee shops and dispensaries, and the current models of distribution and related policies. Then, the
current models of distribution will be defined. Next, the research on cannabis distribution will be
discussed in relation to how dispensaries function as health service providers for medical marijuana
patients, the impact, if any, distribution centers have on cannabis use, and the assumed connection
between cannabis distribution and crime. Finally, recent developments in cannabis policy and their
implications for the growing medical cannabis industry and future research will be discussed.

18.2 History
Establishments that allow for the community use of a psychoactive substance are common. From
coffee shops to bars, to the once popular opium den, communal spaces for sharing psychoactive experiences have been a part of various cultures around the globe. Cannabis coffee shops
in Amsterdam and dispensaries in the US and Canada have become these centers for those who
consume cannabis. While the birth of these two models was under different circumstances, they
share in how they function within their communities.
18.2.1 The birth of the cannabis distribution center: the Amsterdam

coffee shop

A common misperception is that cannabis is legal in the Netherlands. In fact, cannabis is not
legal, but is allowed via de facto legalization. This means that it is not explicitly legal, but not
explicitly illegal. In an effort to curb serious drug use in the 1970s, the government decided to
focus its efforts on eradicating the use of drugs such as heroin and cocaine and letting drugs like
cannabis become less of a priority for law enforcement (Monshouwer et al. 2011). This gray area

340

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

has allowed for an informal network of cannabis coffee shops where patrons can purchase and
consume cannabis and cannabis products such as hashish. One of the drug policy aspects of the
cannabis coffee shop is the resulting separation of markets. This phenomenon refers to a reduction in “harder” drug use (heroin, methamphetamine, etc.) as a result of readily available “soft”
drugs (cannabis, hashish, mushrooms, etc.). The theory is that, by bringing the soft drugs into a
quasi-licit market, consumers do not have to interact with purveyors of harder drugs, therefore
reducing the likelihood of use (MacCoun and Reuter 2001). Officials in the Netherlands decided
that, in order to address the public health issue of substance use, they would concentrate their
policing efforts on hard drug use, and ease up on soft drugs. This policy decision spawned the
birth of coffee shops such as Mellow Yellow, The Melkweg, Rusland, and The Bulldog, a former
brothel in the red-light district. The Netherlands government saw no reason to disrupt this
practice, as long as it was not causing a public health nuisance, which it had not (Bancroft 2010).
The law officially changed in 1976 with the revision of the Opium Act. Since that time, various
regulations have emerged, such as the decision in 1996 to raise the age of consumption from 16
to 18 years and to allow municipalities to decide whether to license coffee shops, and in 1999
to allow mayors to close coffee shops in violation of stated municipal codes (Monshouwer et al.
2011). The small-scale sales and possession of cannabis are regulated and recognized in Dutch
law; however, commercial production in the Netherlands remains a point of legal intervention.
In the Netherlands in 2005–2006, approximately 6000 cannabis nurseries were destroyed and in
2006 the penalty for large-scale cultivation was raised from 4 to 6 years, making it increasingly difficult to supply the coffee shops with cannabis, and there is concern that cutting off the supply will
expand the underground market. Seventy percent of the cannabis purchases in the Netherlands
are done via coffee shops. In 2007, there were approximately 700 coffee shops in the Netherlands
which has steadily decreased since 1997, when there were 1179. In 2011, regulations surfaced
regarding the proximity of one coffee shop to other coffee shops and to secondary schools, echoing similar concerns in the US about the impact that cannabis distribution has on a community
(Monshouwer et al. 2011). In 2012, there was a proposal to prohibit out-of-towners or foreigners
from patronizing the coffee shops by requiring a “weed pass” in order to enter. These passes were
not given to nonresidents. However, the program was scrapped and local jurisdictions were tasked
with enforcement. Another recent policy change prohibits the 220 currently licensed coffee shops
from selling cannabis with a tetrahydrocannabinol level above 15% (Corder 2012). Amsterdam
remains a popular destination for those around the globe eager to sit in a relaxed atmosphere,
calmly select a strain of cannabis, and enjoy a smoke, free from the threat of criminal prosecution.
18.2.2 Medical cannabis comes to the United States

Although the first medical cannabis dispensaries in the US were modeled after the coffee shops
in Amsterdam as a community-based, public health approach to cannabis distribution, actual
cannabis distribution in the US began through a tightly controlled medical program. Modern
US medical cannabis distribution began in 1976 through the Investigational New Drug compassionate access research program. Robert Randall had been diagnosed with glaucoma and found
cannabis to be helpful in relieving intraocular pressure. Claiming medical necessity, Randall went
to court over his right to use cannabis since, in his and his physician’s opinions, available medical
treatments had not been successful. Randall won the case and became the first federal medical
cannabis patient in 1978 (Russo et al. 2002).
This new federal program accepted seriously ill participants and gave them access to up to
nine pounds of cannabis per year. The program did not grow quickly as the application process

Cannabis Distribution: Coffee Shops to Dispensaries

was quite complicated. As such, only six patients were accepted into the program between 1976
and 1988. However, as HIV continued to spread across the US in the 1980s, the compassionate access program began receiving high volumes of applications from AIDS patients who had
heard about the benefits of using cannabis for the pain, depression, and wasting syndromes that
accompanied the disease. In 1989 alone, 34 new patients were granted access into the program.
Then, in 1991 the program was suspended due to the contradiction between access to medical
cannabis and then-President George H.W. Bush’s stance on drug prevention. A year later in 1992,
the program was discontinued. Today, only three patients from the compassionate access program survive. They continue to get medical cannabis from the federal government (Americans
for Safe Access 2004; Pro-con.org 2013).
18.2.3 Medical cannabis dispensaries are born

Outside of the US government’s own cannabis distribution program, medical cannabis dispensaries opened in conjunction with the passing of the first state medical cannabis law. Voters in
California passed Proposition 215 in November 1996 allowing ill Californians to use cannabis for
medical purposes with a doctor’s recommendation. But Proposition 215 produced an immediate backlash with regard to implementation. One month later, then-Drug Czar Barry McCaffrey
threatened to arrest any doctor who recommended cannabis to their patients (McCaffrey 1996).
A group of physicians sued the federal government claiming that preventing them from recommending or even discussing cannabis with their patients violated their First Amendment rights
and infringed on the doctor–patient relationship and their promise of confidentiality (Annas
1997). They won the case (Conant v McCaffrey 1997). Now that doctors were free to recommend
cannabis to their patients, those with a recommendation needed a place to go and obtain their
cannabis. What started out as an informal exchange system out of the home of one man would
grow to become a billion-dollar industry.
Dennis Peron, the initiator of Proposition 215, developed the first medical cannabis dispensaries in San Francisco. Peron’s activism was driven by his partner’s experiences with AIDS and
using medical cannabis to relieve the symptoms associated with his disease. Soon, Peron was distributing cannabis to HIV/AIDS patients out of his San Francisco home. Worried that the police
would discover him and end his program, Peron championed Proposition P in 1992. Proposition
P directed the San Francisco Police Department to make cannabis arrests its lowest priority
(O’Brien 2004), which gave Peron some protection as he continued to distribute medical cannabis
from his home. Peron’s vision was to create a space not only to distribute cannabis to ill people,
but a space for patients to support each other and benefit from contact with others in similar
situations. For many HIV/AIDS patients in San Francisco and elsewhere in the 1990s, isolation
and stigma were common and community became vital for survival. What grew from this vision
has been described as “a combination of a community center and settlement house, a hospice, a
friendly café, and—given the illegal nature of it prior to Proposition 215—a kind of speakeasy
which had the approval and public support of San Francisco’s Board of Supervisors, Mayors Frank
Jordan and Willie Brown, its Department of Health, its District Attorney’s Office, and the administration of the San Francisco Police Department” (Feldman and Mandel 1998, p. 181).
After Proposition 215 was passed in 1996 and medical cannabis became the law of the state,
Peron formalized his distribution by opening the San Francisco Cannabis Buyers Club (SF CBC)
on Market Street in San Francisco. Because they had the support of the local government, the
SF CBC erroneously thought it had license to operate under the new law. However, although
Proposition 215 protects those with a doctor’s recommendation from prosecution for cannabis

341

342

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

possession, it does not establish a licensure system for cannabis distribution. The law does allow
for “caregivers” to provide cannabis to patients who cannot cultivate it themselves (Proposition
215 1996). Dispensaries such as the SF CBC designated itself a caregiver to all the patients that
came in to purchase cannabis. The purchase was viewed as a “reimbursement” for cultivation
costs rather than a retail sale. This issue was brought before the California Supreme Court in
December 1997, where they ruled, 2 to 1, that Proposition 215 did not protect cannabis buyers’
clubs because they were not considered caregivers. After the SF CBC was raided and closed in
1997, additional dispensaries decided to test the new law and began to open up in San Francisco
and other “cannabis friendly” locations across California, such as Santa Cruz and Oakland. By
the end of 1997 when the Supreme Court made their ruling, at least 17 other dispensaries had
opened in California. Furthermore, several local municipalities supported the facilities, making the Supreme Court’s ruling less relevant to the opening and operation of dispensaries in
California (Daley 1997). While they were fighting for their right to exist, what began dividing
dispensaries was what model of service to follow. Peron supported what is now referred to as the
“social club” model and is similar to the coffee shop in Amsterdam (Grinspoon 2004). This model
includes the ability to use cannabis on site (although most local regulations now prohibit this),
and encourages patients to socialize and utilize each other as a support system, mainly through
organized recreational activities. This type of dispensary often offers treatments in addition to
cannabis, such as holistic health services and counseling. In 1997, in the city of San Jose, CA,
however, a second model was brewing. More like a pharmacy than a community center, the Santa
Clara Medical Cannabis Center, founded by Peter Baez, resembled a doctor’s office and was the
first municipally licensed dispensary in the US (Daley 1997). Along with the support of San Jose
officials came regulation requirements for the dispensary. Previously, San Francisco had taken a
hands-off approach when it came to regulating dispensaries within its own municipality. Included
in the San Jose regulations were rules regarding how far dispensaries could be from schools and
churches and requiring the facilities to keep records including patients’ names, photographs, telephone numbers, addresses, ailments, and doctors’ recommendations. Also, police were allowed
to inspect a dispensary’s records and premises at any time without a warrant, patients could not
purchase more than one ounce of cannabis per week, all cannabis had to be grown on site, and the
facility had to be protected by an alarm system (Gaura 1997). These were among the first cannabis
distribution regulations in the US.
While other municipalities were maintaining full involvement in the development and regulation of medical cannabis dispensaries, San Francisco took a different approach. Thus, although
local officials supported the notion of dispensaries and medical cannabis, the city did not impose
regulations as had some of their neighboring communities. The result was that, by 2005, there
were 43 medical cannabis dispensaries in San Francisco. This proliferation of dispensaries finally
compelled the Board of Supervisors to develop regulations for facilities operating within the city
(Argetsinger 2005). Those who managed the dispensaries, as well as advocates in the community,
supported the idea of developing regulations, as long as patient and dispensary input was welcomed and considered. In July 2005, the city of San Francisco declared a 6-month moratorium
on the opening of new dispensaries until regulations could be developed and implemented. This
decision occurred around the same time as a federal raid on three dispensaries in San Francisco
accused of drug-trafficking and money laundering. City Supervisor Ross Mirkarimi started the
process of regulation development, including a call for annual licensing, limits on the number
of dispensaries and where they could operate, and how much profit they could earn, which
were requests very similar to those made in San Jose in 1997. There was concern that major city
involvement might lead to a more pharmacy-style distribution system co-opted by the city or

Cannabis Distribution: Coffee Shops to Dispensaries

state. Social model clubs were revered by the patient population in San Francisco because they
encouraged community and patient interaction. Dispensary managers echoed this concern and
requested that the city require dispensary operators to be medical cannabis patients themselves
in order to increase the comfort level of their clients and to increase the feeling of security and
quality protection at the dispensary (Argetsinger 2005). The moratorium on new dispensaries in
San Francisco expired November 20, 2005. Public hearings were held to allow public discussion
concerning the regulations (Goodyear 2005). At the end of November, 2005, San Francisco drew
up regulations for its estimated 35 medical cannabis dispensaries. Included in the regulations were
the following:
◆

◆

◆

Dispensaries must apply for business permits which include criminal and employment background checks.
Dispensary owners must pay $6610 per year for a permit in addition to $3100 for a business
license (this was changed to an $8549 application fee and the implementation of an 8.5% sales
tax in 2010).
Zoning regulations, including no dispensaries in industrial or residential areas as well as a
minimum of 500 feet from schools or daycare centers, 1000 feet if cannabis is used on the
premises (Leff 2005).

18.2.4 Medical cannabis distribution in the Netherlands

While the US was struggling to define its medical cannabis distribution program, other nations
developed their own medical cannabis policies and practices regarding distribution. Beginning
in September 2003, the Netherlands required every pharmacy to keep cannabis in stock and dispense it to those with a doctor’s prescription. Pharmacists were instructed to provide advice on
use and reducing the harm associated with inhaling a smoked substance. Unlike the product sold
in coffee shops, the Ministry of Health regulates the medical cannabis obtained at pharmacies in
the Netherlands, which is grown in a medical grade facility, for quality. There were, however, still
those critical of the move from small, personally owned medical cannabis operations to the larger,
government-run pharmacy model. The worry was that the patients would pay with higher prices
for cannabis and receive impersonal care (Conway 2003).
18.2.5 Pharmacy versus social model of care

While the pharmacy model is viewed as easier to control due to its centralized nature, the social
model might be more appropriate for both the cannabis plant and those who consume it. Research
suggests that the social support garnered by patients in a dispensary environment and the impact
of service availability can be beneficial to those with serious and/or chronic illness (Reiman 2007,
2008a, 2008b). However, with the growth of complex local regulations, changes, such as the ability
to use cannabis at the dispensary and the desire to keep spaces small, standardized, and nondescript, have moved the distribution system away from the social model and toward the pharmacy
model. As more dispensaries started opening in California in the early 2000s, more cities decided
to be proactive and institute a variety of regulations including: obtaining a business license from
the city and operating as a nonprofit organization, limits on the number of dispensaries in a city,
restrictions on dispensary location, limits on the amount of cannabis that can be bought and/
or possessed by patients, limits on the number of cannabis plants on site, and the prohibition of
cannabis consumption on premises (Richie 2004). Not included in these early regulations were
rules to protect the patients and the medical care process. For example, regulations did not include

343

344

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

protocols for collecting and storing patient information or a declaration of patient protection in
the case of federal interference. Furthermore, regulations did not mandate that dispensary workers have any special training or knowledge of cannabis or illnesses for which cannabis is used. This
is starting to change, as Washington, DC has become the first jurisdiction to require training for
all those working in the medical cannabis distribution industry. In addition to completing 4 hours
of training, participants must pass an exam (Americans for Safe Access 2012).
Regulation of medical cannabis dispensaries is complicated. On the one hand, regulations
can help distinguish and legitimize medical cannabis dispensaries as health service providers
instead of drug dealing operations. This might be a protective factor against federal interference.
Furthermore, in the case of federal interference, adhering to local regulations might ensure the
support of local government and law enforcement on the side of dispensaries. On the other hand,
adaptation of the dispensing of medical cannabis into the larger system of public healthcare might
be the end of the social club model that was the vision of Dennis Peron in 1992, as limited funds
and staffing might affect the level of personalized care a large, centralized health program can
provide. Satisfaction with the federal program in Canada is extremely low and most Canadian
patients obtain their cannabis from small, community-based distribution centers (Lucas 2012).
The coffee shops in Amsterdam emerged out of a desire to address the most serious public health
concerns in the Netherlands. Left to their own devices, coffee shops became cultural icons and
tourist destinations. Ironically, although emerging from a more restrictive medical model in the
US, the first medical cannabis dispensaries in the US looked very similar to the most famous of
Amsterdam’s coffee shops, enshrining the original distribution system in what would become
modern-day cannabis provision in the US.

18.3 Current models and policies
California was the first state to formalize a medical cannabis distribution system on the local
level. But, as more states began to pass medical cannabis legislation, the question arose of whether
regulation was better made at the local or state level. While local regulations allow dispensaries
to reflect the needs and desires of citizens at the community level, state-wide regulation may provide more protection from federal interference, and provides uniform rules for all involved in the
industry in that state to comply with, thereby cutting down on confusion and potential law suits.
Sections 18.3.1–18.3.3 will review the various models of cannabis distribution that have been
developed and the policies around distribution that have been adopted by different states in the
US that allow the use of medical cannabis.
18.3.1 Models of cannabis distribution

To date, four types of medical cannabis distribution have emerged, shaped by local and state regulation: storefronts, direct from garden to patient (caregiver model), delivery, and growing co-op.
Some issues related to distribution, such as how cannabis is obtained for distribution and physical
space requirements, will differ based on the model. The various models are defined as follows:
18.3.1.1 Storefront

A storefront is what is most often thought of when someone pictures a dispensary or coffee shop.
A storefront is a physical location where qualified individuals (medical cannabis patients in the
US, those over 18 years in the Netherlands, and those over 21 years in the US states of Washington
and Colorado) can obtain cannabis. Usually, cannabis is brought to the storefront by a cannabis
cultivator or wholesaler, and patients then purchase the product at the storefront location. Social

Cannabis Distribution: Coffee Shops to Dispensaries

model dispensaries are most often storefronts, as patients are encouraged to stay and socialize.
Oftentimes, additional services, such as healthcare and counseling are offered in store front locations. Those who operate storefronts might obtain cannabis from a third-party grower, or they
might produce the cannabis themselves in another location or at the same location as the storefront. Some states, such as Colorado, New Mexico, and Maine, have policies concerning who can
provide cannabis to a storefront. These policies will be discussed later in the chapter. An example
of a storefront that primarily cultivates their own cannabis at another location is the San Francisco
Patients Resource Center (SPARC) (Fig. 18.1).
The storefront model of a dispensary is similar to the coffee shop in Amsterdam. In fact, one
of the first storefront dispensaries in Oakland, CA, was named The Bulldog, after the iconic
Amsterdam coffee shop. Furthermore, when several dispensaries settled in one area in Oakland,
the area became known as Oaksterdam, a moniker that has stuck and is now the neighborhood
that houses Oaksterdam University, the first trade school for those working in the medical cannabis industry (Oaksterdam University 2012).
18.3.1.2 Direct from garden to patient (caregiver model)

In this model, patients obtain cannabis directly from the cultivator either at the garden or through
an ancillary location. While the cannabis is primarily grown by the distributor in this model,
some states, such as New Mexico, allow licensed distributors to trade cannabis products with
each other, although the majority of what is provided through the garden must be produced by
its purveyor. Referred to as “vertical integration,” the act of requiring a closed-loop system from
cultivation to distribution is popular in modern cannabis regulation because of the belief that

Fig. 18.1 Called the Apple Store of dispensaries, SPARC offers a wide variety of products as well as
music, trivia and other social events for their patients.
Photo courtesy of SPARC.

345

346

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

vertical integration allows for better oversight and less diversion. Some patients prefer this model
because they feel the product is fresher, similar to obtaining produce at a farmer’s market versus
the grocery store.
18.3.1.3 Delivery service

Although not permitted in all states that allow medical cannabis, in the delivery model, patients
place an order via phone or online. Delivery services most often do not have a storefront but a
center of operations from which orders are received and vehicles are dispatched. Some dispensaries operate both a storefront and delivery service. Sometimes this is in an effort to expand service
and reach patients who are homebound or receiving hospice care. Sometimes delivery services are
started because storefront locations are shut down by the federal government. Such was the case
when Berkeley Patients Group, located in Berkeley, CA, was shuttered. The dispensary ran a delivery service while securing a new storefront location so as not to disrupt service to their patients.
The delivery service continued even after a new storefront was secured (Berkeley Patients Group
2012). While some are skeptical about delivery services because of the ease of obtaining cannabis,
concerns about driving while intoxicated are quelled by this model compared to the social model
where consumption might be allowed at the dispensary. However, while delivery services are
helpful for patients who are homebound and too ill to travel, they remove the social interaction
that Peron and others involved early in dispensary creation felt was so important.
18.3.1.4 Growing co-op

A co-op model might be considered by some to be what voters in California had in mind when
they approved Proposition 215. In this model, a group of patients gets together and grows cannabis collectively on property belonging to the entire group or a member of the group. Members
of the co-op share in the harvest and their share is earned by contributing to the cultivation process. Duties can vary based on ability and are decided upon by the group. The growing co-op is a
closed-loop system in that patients who are not members of the co-op may not obtain cannabis
from the co-op. Recently, a court decision in California ruled that all members of a co-op do
not have to actively participate in the cultivation process to obtain product grown by the co-op.
This was an important decision because it finally clarified that a dispensary can be designated a
caregiver, which was a point of contention in early California dispensary development (People v
Jackson 2012). One of the most well-known growing co-ops is WAMM (Wo/men’s Alliance for
Medical Marijuana). Run by longtime cannabis activist Valerie Corral and located in Santa Cruz,
CA, WAMM currently serves about 250 patients and was the subject of the book, Dying to Get
High by Wendy Chapkis in 2008 (WAMM 2012).
18.3.2 Current policies: California and beyond

Since California passed Proposition 215 in 1996, 21 other states, plus Washington, DC, have also
passed laws allowing for the use of cannabis with a doctor’s recommendation. However, not all of
these states have established programs for distributing cannabis to patients. The next section will
review the current cannabis distribution policies in the US and Canada. Various types of regulation will be discussed, as well as the move from a federal to private distribution program that has
recently been proposed in Canada.
18.3.2.1 Locally regulated: California

As previously discussed, California does not currently impose state-level regulations on the distribution of medical cannabis. Rather, local cities and counties have developed their own regulations.

Cannabis Distribution: Coffee Shops to Dispensaries

There have been attempts to develop a state-level regulatory system, most recently in 2014 with
two bills, Assembly Bill 1894 introduced by Assembly member Tom Ammiano, and Senate Bill
1262 introduced by Senator Lou Correa. Both bills are currently being considered by the California
legislature. As it stands today, California is a patchwork of regulation, with some localities banning
dispensaries all together, and others creating a complex system of regulation. In those localities
that have chosen to impose regulations, there are some commonalities that hold across jurisdictions: a city licensure process, a limit on total number of dispensaries in the city, establishment of
an oversight committee, strict zoning laws that dictate where dispensaries can be located, and flexible regulations that allow for the ever-changing cannabis regulatory landscape. In cities that have
been slow to regulate, the proliferation of dispensaries has soured some on the idea of cannabis as
medicine. Los Angeles, is currently trying to implement voter approved Measure D which allows
only dispensaries licensed before 2007 to stay open. This was a reaction to the constant scrutiny of
the free-market impact that a lack of regulation has had. In the absence of regulation, there were
an estimated 1000 dispensaries in Los Angeles and the city council had thus far taken a hands-off
approach to regulation, insisting that it is the job of the state, not the city to create such a structure
(Onishi 2012). Another outcome of a lack of clear regulation is lawsuits. Attempts by cities to ban
dispensaries or be selective concerning which dispensaries can open have led to lawsuits which
have both slowed and clarified the distribution system in California (City of Riverside v Inland
Empire Patient’s Health and Wellness Center; People v Jackson; Pack v City of Long Beach). The lack
of structure in California’s cannabis distribution program has encouraged other medical cannabis
states to either avoid the issue completely and continue with a system of informal distribution, or
develop tightly controlled, state-level regulations regarding distribution.
18.3.2.2 Informal distribution: Oregon and Washington

Oregon and Washington passed medical cannabis legislation shortly after California (1998).
However, neither state law describes a state-level distribution program, although both state laws
protect patients and their caregivers from criminal prosecution for cannabis. In Washington,
medical cannabis patients may create and participate in collective gardens for the purpose
of producing, processing, transporting, and delivering cannabis. The law stipulates that no
more than ten qualifying patients may participate in a single collective garden at any time and
regulates how many plants can be grown at one time and stored at the garden. Furthermore,
no useable cannabis from the collective garden can be delivered to anyone other than one of
the participating patients. Cannabis distribution in Washington follows a true co-op model,
which requires that patients share responsibility for acquiring and supplying the resources
are required to produce and process the cannabis. Members are responsible for securing a
location for a collective garden; equipment, supplies, and labor necessary to plant, grow, and
harvest the cannabis. Patients may also grow their own cannabis for their own personal use
(Washington State Legislature 2012). In Oregon, patients can cultivate their own cannabis, or
designate a caregiver to grow it for them. Caregivers can grow for more than one patient. As
in Washington, there are limits to the number of plants that can be grown by each patient/
caregiver and the amount of dried cannabis that can be at the grow site or possessed by the
patient/caregiver (Oregon Medical Marijuana Act 1998). Just like California’s law, Oregon and
Washington’s policies do not establish a state-level structure for the creation, development,
and oversight of cannabis distribution. Concerns over access for patients and the ability to
institute quality control and oversight into the burgeoning cannabis industry led states such
as Colorado, New Mexico, and Maine to institute tightly controlled, vertically integrated distribution systems.

347

348

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

18.3.2.3 Vertical integration: New Mexico, Maine, and Colorado

Perhaps in response to the ambiguity of distribution policies in California, Washington, and
Oregon, states were soon looking to rein in cannabis distribution via tight regulatory models
focused on vertical integration. Vertical integration refers to the attempt by a state to regulate
every aspect of medical cannabis cultivation, manufacturing, and distribution by creating closedloop systems which involve the fewest players possible. Three states that have adopted regulations
in the context of vertical integration are New Mexico, Maine, and Colorado. Table 18.1 describes
the variations in the three state programs regarding distribution and the aspects of each that fall
under vertical integration.
The complex regulatory structures developed by these states rely on a sophisticated cannabis
industry able to fulfill the obligations set by the states for compliance. As such, organizations such
as the National Cannabis Industry Association (http://thecannabisindustry.org/) have developed
to organize the industry, help set the standards for future cannabis distribution, and address issues
of federal interference around banking, taxation, and labor. Advances in packaging and product

Table 18.1 Vertical integration in cannabis distribution programs: New Mexico, Maine, and Colorado
New Mexico

Maine

Colorado

Distribution

Done via the state licensed
producers. In a garden to
patient model, cannabis is
distributed by the producer

Done via the state licensed
producers. Dispensaries
must produce their own
cannabis

Done through state licensed
centers. 70% of cannabis
dispensed through a
dispensary must be grown by
that dispensary

For/non
profit

Non-profit

Non-profit

Can be for profit

Vertical
integration

Licensed producers may
obtain plants, seeds, and/
or other usable cannabis
from other licensed
producers only

Patients may only belong to
one dispensary. Dispensaries
may cultivate up to 6
mature plants per registered
patient. Dispensaries must
cultivate their own
cannabis. Cannabis may be
donated to a dispensary
from a caregiver who has
extra. This may be given to
low-income patients, but
cannot be resold

70% of product distributed
must be produced by that
dispensary. Licensed
dispensaries may contract
with licensed infused product
makers. A licensee may
purchase up to 30% of its
total inventory from another
licensed dispensary. Infused
product licensees, may not
use cannabis from more than
5 licensed dispensaries

Zoning

Personal grow sites and
nonprofit dispensing
entities may not be located
within 300 feet of any
school, church, or day-care
center. In addition, the
applicant must
demonstrate that the
cannabis is not visible from
streets or public areas

A dispensary or its grow site
if cannabis is not grown at
the retail dispensary site
may not locate within 500
feet of the property line of a
preexisting public or private
school

Must be 1000 feet from
other licensed facilities,
schools, alcohol and drug
treatment centers, principal
campus of a university, or
seminary, or residential child
care facility. Localities may
adjust this distance or choose
not to allow medical cannabis
businesses in their city

Cannabis Distribution: Coffee Shops to Dispensaries

development, security requirements, dispensary pay rolls, insurance and retirement plans, and
ever-changing restrictions on advertising have spawned an ancillary cannabis industry. In the
US, the cannabis industry has relied heavily on private investment given the refusal of the federal
government to engage with the program, except to try and stop it. This has not been the case
elsewhere. Canada has had a federal medical cannabis distribution program since 1999 (Lucas
2012). However, a recent decision to shift the program from federal to private control has raised
questions.
18.3.3 A shift from government program to private industry: Canada

Canada’s medical cannabis distribution program was similar in nature to the informal systems in
Oregon and Washington. The federal government oversees the registry of patients, and patients
can obtain a permit from the government to cultivate their own medicine. Informal dispensaries popped up in more progressive areas of the country as a clearinghouse for patients to bring
cannabis they had grown for redistribution among other patients. In 2010, these communitybased dispensaries served over 30,000 Canadian patients, while the federal program only registered 4884 people. This was due to the complicated registration process and quality and safety
concerns over the product produced by the one government licensed cultivator, Prairie Plant
Systems (Lucas 2012). The lack of satisfaction with the federal program has led more Canadians
to obtain personal cultivation licenses, 26,000 being issued between 2000 and 2010. As a result,
in 2012, the decision was made to stop the country’s federal program, including the personal
cultivation licenses, in favor of vertical integration, for which a handful of cultivators will be
chosen to produce and distribute cannabis to those in the federal program. Personal cultivation
will not be allowed. The government plans to implement the new program by March 31, 2014
(Burgmann 2012).
Once states began to pass laws removing criminal penalties for those using cannabis with a
doctor’s recommendation, they had no choice but to address how patients were to obtain the
cannabis. Various distribution systems, from local regulation, to informal distribution to vertical integration have created a naturally occurring experiment that has made it possible to obtain
information about various aspects of cannabis distribution and its impact the health and wellbeing not only of patients, but also of the communities in which they exist.

18.4 Research
Medical cannabis dispensaries in the US and Canada are a fairly new phenomenon even though
coffee shops in Amsterdam have existed since the 1970s. Concerns about those who patronize
these facilities, the impact that these facilities have on their communities, and the cannabis-using
behavior of those in proximity have spawned a flurry of research in recent years in an attempt to
better understand the implications and outcomes associated with cannabis distribution. Sections
18.4.1–18.4.3 will review the research on cannabis distribution from coffee shops and dispensaries
in the context of alternative healthcare, cannabis use by those in proximity to distribution centers,
and the relationship between dispensaries and crime.
18.4.1 Dispensaries as alternative health service providers

Part of Dennis Peron’s vision of a dispensary was its role as an alternative health service provider. Beliefs about the relationship between health, socialization, medicine, and community
helped shape the first dispensaries to be part pharmacy, part community center, and part alternative medicine sanctuary. Feldman and Mandel (1998) provided the first exploratory and

349

350

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

ethnographic study of a dispensary via their examination of the SF CBC that included interviews
and participant observation. At the time of this study, the SF CBC was a four-story building on
Market Street in San Francisco. Participants reported positive benefits from the support-group
atmosphere of the facility. Furthermore, for those dealing with a terminal illness, the dispensary was a place for support and grief when friends and fellow medical cannabis patients died.
After 2 years of interviews and observation, the authors concluded that the social club model of
cannabis dispensary was the preferred method of distribution. Another early study of medical
cannabis dispensaries in the US was one that focused on 57 medical cannabis patients at the SF
CBC (Mikuriya 1995). Although the purpose of the study was to generate demographic data
and information on the use of cannabis as self-medication, it included a colorful description of
the SF CBC:
Several doors away from a busy street corner is a nondescript door with a peep lens. Pressing the doorbell between the hours of 10 am and 7 pm weekdays, the door is opened by a doorman who asks to
see the numbered club card . . . Entering midway into a large old former dime-a-dance hall above the
bar below. The room is well lit from clerestory windows. The ceiling is covered by a huge rainbow flag.
The walls are covered with local artists’ work and political posters . . . A large old dining room table
dominates the center of the room, a semi-circle of sofas at the left, and smaller tables against the wall
on the right accommodate the buyers. Joints are rolled, pipes and water pipes are filled and shared from
medium grade cannabis furnished by the house on small trays. The dealers measure out the cannabis
from behind a “bar” where buyers inspect and purchase cannabis . . . In addition to smoked cannabis,
baked goods for oral use are sold . . . On the periphery, tables with diverse health and informational
literature provide reading materials for the buyers. Stationary, postage and lists of politicians provide
other activities for buyers, staff and visitors. (Mikuriya 1995, p. 2)

Early dispensaries such as the SF CBC often offered a myriad of alternative health services in
addition to cannabis, such as acupuncture, massage, and harm reduction groups. Rarely given
the chance to participate in some of these services outside the dispensary (services were often
free for patients), many patients viewed their dispensary as not only a place to obtain cannabis, but a place to engage in other methods of healing and self-awareness. Reiman’s (2008a)
study of 130 medical cannabis patients showed 66% of the sample using social services at their
dispensary once or twice per week, 22% using life services such as food and housing help once
or twice per week, and 46% using entertainment services once or twice per week. Dispensary
familiarity, staff, and a feeling of comfort and security were listed as the most important reasons
patients choose a particular dispensary. A more recent survey of 303 medical cannabis patients
at a dispensary in California in 2011 revealed that 62% reported a desire to participate in free
clinical services at the dispensary, 34% desired more information about substances and use,
and 41% wanted to learn more about reducing harms from substance use. About one-quarter
of the participants “would” or “likely would” participate in individual services such as consultation, psycho-educational forums, harm reduction information-sharing sessions, online support
groups, and coping, life, and social skills groups (Janichek and Reiman 2012). In a qualitative
report developed for a dispensary in Berkeley, CA, in-depth patient interviews revealed that, for
many patients, alternative health services provided by their dispensary act as a bridge for times
when they cannot afford those treatments on their own accord. Patients reported that these
services allow them to continually improve, without lapses in care (Reiman 2008b). Although
the public is generally supportive of increasing access to healthcare, there has been concern
expressed in the US and the Netherlands as to how the increased access to cannabis through
distribution centers has impacted the use rates of those who live in proximity to these facilities,
especially young people.

Cannabis Distribution: Coffee Shops to Dispensaries

18.4.2 Distribution centers and cannabis use

Most of the research on the impact of cannabis distribution and related policies on cannabis use
has come from the Netherlands, save for research on youth use in the US. The Netherlands, like
the US, conducts a general population survey aimed at assessing the prevalence of drug use. When
looking at the Netherlands compared to other European nations without cannabis distribution,
use is relatively low. The European average for recent use among those aged 15–64 is 6.8%, compared to the Dutch rate of 5.4%. This difference remains when looking at 15–34-year-olds (12.5%
vs. 9.5%). The highest prevalence is in Spain (24.3% and 20.3% respectively for both age groups)
and the lowest is in Greece (3.6% and 3.2% respectively). Furthermore, cannabis use among Dutch
teens aged 12–17 has been on a steady decline since 1996, which some feel might be due to policies increasing the age of consumption from 16 to18 and the decline in the number of coffee shops
between 1997 and 2007 (Monshouwer et al. 2011). The separation in markets referred to earlier
can also be assessed by looking at Dutch drug use rates. According to a study by Craig Reinarman
(2009), hard drug rates are higher in San Francisco than Amsterdam although cannabis access
is greater in Amsterdam and cannabis use rates for the two cities are similar. A concern over the
tightening of regulations in the Netherlands and the reduction in the number of coffee shops is an
increase in underground purchases where hard drugs may be more available (Monshouwer et al.
2011). There are several complications in comparing cannabis use in the Netherlands to use in the
US. First, use in both countries seems to occur in waves, fueled by cultural occurrences. Secondly,
general population surveys do not always employ the same methodology and can therefore yield
noncomparable results (Korf 2002). In the US, there has been particular concern about the impact
of dispensaries on youth use. This concern is primarily based on the assumption that proximity
to cannabis distribution impacts use. This theory was tested in Amsterdam in a 2012 study that
concluded that proximity to coffee shops was not associated with frequency or intensity of cannabis use or harder drug use (Wouters et al. 2012). Research on the cannabis use patterns of medical
cannabis patients in the US who utilize dispensaries reveals that most patients report no change in
their cannabis use over the past 6 months. Furthermore, many patients report using cannabis as a
substitute for alcohol and harder drugs (Lucas et al. 2013; Reiman 2007 and 2009). Concerns over
dispensaries and access to medical cannabis encouraging teen use spawned a 2011 report which
assessed changes in youth use in medical cannabis states after laws were passed Of the 13 states
with medical cannabis laws at the time of the study, all but the two most recent states to pass laws
(Michigan and New Mexico) showed declines in teen cannabis use after medical cannabis laws
went into effect (O’Keefe and Earleywine 2011). In both the Netherlands and the US, cannabis
distribution does not seem to be related to an increase in cannabis use.
18.4.3 Dispensaries and crime

One of the most common concerns surrounding cannabis distribution is the risk of crime. Both
concerns over the patrons of the dispensary and the risk of burglary, has spawned tight security
regulations for dispensaries and NIMBY (“not in my backyard”) arguments against cannabis distribution. However, these concerns are largely unfounded. A recent study by Kepple and Freisthler
(2012) employed an ecological design to examine the relationship between dispensary density,
property, and violent crime in Los Angeles, California. The authors found no relationship between
dispensary density and property or violent crime. Another study (Kintz 2010) looked at the 2010
census data for 189 census tracts in San Francisco to assess the relationship between dispensaries
and neighborhood criminal activity. The author found no relationship between dispensaries and
community crime. Furthermore, a 2009 analysis by the Denver Police Department found that

351

352

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

dispensaries were robbed at lower rates than both banks and liquor stores (Ingold 2010). Similar
findings surfaced in Los Angeles in 2009 when the police chief announced that the Los Angeles
Police Department received reports of 71 robberies at the more than 350 banks in the city, compared with 47 robberies at medical cannabis dispensaries which, at the time, numbered at least
800 (Castro 2010). Despite this evidence, most medical cannabis distribution centers are required
to be a certain number of feet from sensitive areas such as schools, churches and day care centers.
As the regulation of cannabis distribution in the US, Canada, and the Netherlands continues to
evolve, more research will be required to determine the best practices for cannabis distribution.
There are several recent developments that will impact how this practice looks in the years to come.

18.5 Conclusion: the expansion and formalization of cannabis

distribution
Since the first coffee shops appeared in Amsterdam in the 1970s, cannabis distribution has continued to evolve. The California dispensaries that paved the way for 17 other states plus Washington,
DC, borrowed their models of distribution from the coffee shops in Amsterdam. Today, the
Netherlands, Canada, and the US contain a variety of cannabis distribution models, from social
clubs to pharmacies. So, what is the next frontier for cannabis distribution in the US and elsewhere? That question was answered on Election Day 2012, when Colorado and Washington
became the first US states to legalize cannabis for anyone aged 21 and over, even without a doctor’s
recommendation. While simple possession became legal in those states shortly after the election,
both states have a period of time to develop a distribution system. Colorado, given the existence
of a tightly regulated medical cannabis distribution system, is planning on expanding that system
to include all adults, not just medical cannabis patients, while Washington, with its informal
distribution network, will most likely develop a brand new system for distributing cannabis.
Differences in the laws exist. In Colorado, persons are allowed to cultivate up to six cannabis
plants. In Washington, personal cultivation is not allowed, unless a person is a medical cannabis
patient. The federal government in the US has yet to announce how it will approach the idea of
cannabis distribution. Other states likely to consider legalization for adult use in the near future
include Maine, Rhode Island, California, and Oregon (Dickinson 2012).
Although this chapter has focused on the Netherlands, US, and Canada, other nations are
beginning to experiment with their marijuana policies as well, although none but Israel has developed sophisticated distribution methods for medical marijuana. In 2001, Portugal became the
first European nation to decriminalize possession of all drugs, resulting in a steep decline in HIV
infection, illicit drug use, and addiction (Szalavitz 2009). Belize is also considering decriminalizing marijuana, while other nations, such as Mexico are considering the legalization of marijuana,
along with establishing a system of distribution within the country (Cave 2012; Torres 2012;
Williams 2012). In 2013, Uruguay became the first nation in the world to fully legalize marijuana.
Along with policy changes in the US and abroad, formal organizations and institutions are taking on the task of determining the best practices for cannabis distribution. Although not a formal
government organization, the American Herbal Products Association (AHPA) is responsible for
the regulation of herbal vitamins and supplements that are sold in stores by not regulated by the
Food and Drug Administration (e.g., hemp products, herbal supplements, and remedies). The
AHPA has a cannabis committee that has been working with the medical cannabis patient advocacy group, Americans for Safe Access, since 2011 on the development of regulatory guidelines
for the cultivation, analysis, manufacturing and distribution of cannabis in the US. These guidelines, developed by experts from the cannabis industry, and the dietary supplement regulation

Cannabis Distribution: Coffee Shops to Dispensaries

industry are meant to guide regulators in how to create protocols in line with how other herbal products are currently regulated in the US (McGuffin 2012). Additionally, Humboldt State
University in Northern California has recently instituted the Humboldt Interdisciplinary Institute
for Marijuana Research (HIIMR) which will bring together scientists across fields to study the
environmental, economic and public health aspects of cannabis and cannabis regulation. It is the
first institute of its kind in the US. (http://www.humboldt.edu/hiimr/).
Cannabis distribution is a complex issue. In the 35 short years since Amsterdam saw its first
coffee shop, cannabis policies and public attitudes have swung in both directions. Currently, with
the fast-growing cannabis movement in the US and elsewhere, there is greater interest than ever
in effective methods of distributing cannabis. Those with vested interests disagree as to the best
model of delivery and the level of control that must exist to protect both access to cannabis and
public safety. What has resulted is a naturally occurring experiment of various models of distribution and methods of regulation. Eventually, and with proper research, it can be determined what
aspects of regulation and distribution models will meet the needs of a rapidly changing cannabis
market and consumer population.

References
Americans for Safe Access. (2004). Patients in the Crossfire. Berkeley, CA: Americans for Safe Access.
Americans for Safe Access. (2012). Medical Marijuana Patient Group Gets D.C. Department of Health
Contract to Train Dispensary, Cultivation Center Staff. [Online] Available at: http://americansforsafeaccess.org/medical-marijuana-patient-group-gets-dc-department-of-health-contract-to-train-dispensarycultivation-center-staff.
Annas, G. (1997). Reefer madness: the federal response to California’s medical marijuana law. New England
Journal of Medicine, 337, 435–439.
Argetsinger, A. (2005). Pot-club owners seek regulation; medical marijuana is falling into the wrong hands,
proprietors fear. Washington Post, July 1, A3.
Bancroft, S. (2010). The history of Amsterdam’s coffee shops. Suite101.com, September 23. [Online]
Available at: http://suite101.com/article/the-history-of-amsterdams-coffee-shops-a289211.
Berkeley Patients Group. (2012). Delivery Service Information. [Online] Available at: http://www.berkeleypatientsgroup.com/delivery.html.
Burgmann, T. (2012). Medical marijuana delivery to go private. Huffington Post (Canada), December
17. [Online] Available at: http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2012/12/16/medical-marijuana-deliveryprivate_n_2312600.html
Castro, T. (2010). Pot clinics draw fewer robberies than banks: chief says LAPD study disproves commonly
held belief about dispensaries. L.A. Daily News, January 17, A1.
Cave, D. (2012). Uruguay: a vote for marijuana. New York Times, November 15. [Online] Available at:
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/16/world/americas/uruguay-a-vote-for-marijuana.html?_r=0.
Chapkis, W. (2008). Dying to Get High: Marijuana as Medicine. New York: NYU Press.
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (2012). Colorado Medical Marijuana
Registry Home Page. [Online] Available at: http://www.colorado.gov/cs/Satellite/CDPHE-CHEIS/
CBON/1251593016680.
Conant v MacCaffrey (1997). No. C 97-00139 WHA. Filed in the United States District Court of Northern
California.
Conway, I. (2003). Medical marijuana goes on sale in Dutch pharmacies. The Independent (London),
Foreign News, September 1, 9.

353

354

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Corder, M. (2012). Amsterdam’s pot-selling coffee shops remain open to tourists. Huffington Post,
November 20. [Online] Available at: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/11/20/amsterdam-touristswill-still-visit-pot-coffee-shops_n_2164926.html.
Daley, Y. (1997). California marijuana clubs under fire; Court says they aren’t dispensaries. Boston Globe,
December 21, A8.
Dickenson, T. (2012). The next seven states to legalize pot. Rolling Stone, December, 18. [Online]
Available at: http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/the-next-seven-states-to-legalizepot-20121218.
Feldman, H. and Mandel, J. (1998). Providing medical marijuana: the importance of cannabis clubs.
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 30, 179–186.
Gaura, M. (1997). San Jose is first to regulate medical marijuana clubs; rules require photo ID, on site pot
cultivation. San Francisco Chronicle, May 16, A14.
Goodyear, C. (2005). Supervisors working on new rules for pot clubs; regulations could include waiting
lists, distance regulations. San Francisco Chronicle, October 7, B5.
Grinspoon, L. (2004). Medical marihuana in a time of prohibition. In: J. Inciardi and K. McElrath (eds.).
The American Drug Scene: An Anthology. 4th ed. Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury Publishing Company,
pp.121 –130.
Ingold, J. (2010). Cops: pot shop robbery rate is below banks. Denver Post, January 27, B01.
Janichek, J. and Reiman, A. (2012). Clinical service desires of medical cannabis patients. Harm Reduction
Journal, 9, 12.
Kepple, N. and Freisthler, B. (2012). Exploring the ecological association between crime and medical marijuana dispensaries. Journal on the Study of Alcohol and Drugs, 73, 523–530.
Kintz, M. (2010). Smoke and Mirrors? Examining the relationship between medical cannabis dispensaries and
crime. Completed as part of the requirements for a Master’s Degree in Public Policy from the Goldman
School of Public Policy, University of California, Berkeley.
Korf, D. (2002). Dutch coffee shops and trends in cannabis use. Addictive Behaviors, 27, 851–866.
Leff, L. (2005). San Francisco adopts rules for pot clubs. The Washington Post, November 16.
Lucas, P. (2012). It can’t hurt to ask: a patient-centered quality of service assessment of health Canada’s
medical cannabis policy and program. Harm Reduction Journal, 9, 2.
Lucas, P., Reiman, A., Earleywine, M., et al. (2013). Cannabis as a substitute for alcohol and other drugs:
a dispensary-based survey of substitution effect in Canadian medical cannabis patients. Addiction
Research and Theory, 21, 435–442.
McCaffrey, B. (1996). The Administration’s response to the passage of California Proposition 215 and
Arizona’s Proposition 200. Statement released by Barry McCaffrey, Director of the Office of National
Drug Control Policy, December 30. Washington, DC: Executive Office of the President.
McGuffin, M. (2012). Personal communication regarding the development of cannabis distribution guidelines with Michael McGuffin, President of the American Herbal Products Association.
MacCoun, R. and Reuter, P. (2001). Drug War Heresies: Learning from Other Vices, Places and Times.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Maine Department of Health and Human Services. (2012). Maine’s Medical Marijuana Law. [Online]
Available at: http://www.maine.gov/legis/lawlib/medmarij.html.
Mikuriya, T. (1995). Medicinal Cannabis Users at a “Buyers” Club. [Online] Available at: http://safeaccessnow.org/article.php?id=2830.
Monshouwer, K., Van Laar, M., and Vollebergh, W. (2011). Buying Cannabis in ‘coffee shops’. Drug and
Alcohol Review, 30, 148–156.
New Mexico Department of Health. (2012). Medical Cannabis Program. [Online] Available at: http://
nmhealth.org/mcp/.
O’Brien, M. (2004). Regarding Medical Marijuana. [Documentary] United States: MoFilms.

Cannabis Distribution: Coffee Shops to Dispensaries

O’Keefe, K. and Earleywine, M. (2011). Marijuana Use by Young People: The Impact of State Medical
Marijuana Laws. Washington, DC: Marijuana Policy Project.
Oaksterdam University. (2012). Quality Training for the Cannabis Industry. [Online] Available at: http://
www.oaksterdamuniversity.com/#.
Onishi, N. (2012). Marijuana Only for the Sick? A Farce, Some Angelenos Say. Los Angeles Times, October
7. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/08/us/california-fight-to-ensure-marijuana-goes-only-to-sick.
html?_r=0.
Oregon Medical Marijuana Act. (1998). [Online] Available at: http://public.health.oregon.gov/
DiseasesConditions/ChronicDisease/MedicalMarijuanaProgram/Documents/statutes.pdf.
People v Jackson (2012). D058988. San Diego County Superior Court. SCD222793.
Pro-Con.Org (2013). Medical Marijuana: Who are the patients receiving medical marijuana through the federal government's Compassionate IND program? [Online]. Available at: http://medicalmarijuana.procon.
org/view.answers.php?questionID=000257.
Proposition 215. (1996). Compassionate Use Act of 1996.
Reiman, A. (2007). Patient profiles: medical cannabis patients and health care utilization patterns.
Complementary Health Practice Review, 12(1), 31–50.
Reiman, A. (2008a). Self-efficacy, social support and service integration at medical cannabis facilities in the
San Francisco Bay area of California. Health and Social Care in the Community, 16(1), 31–41.
Reiman, A. (2008b). A Social Model of Cannabis Care: Berkeley Patients Group. Berkeley, CA: Berkeley
Patients Group.
Reiman, A. (2009). Cannabis as a substitute for alcohol and other drugs. Harm Reduction Journal, 6, 35.
Reinarman C. (2009). Cannabis policies and user practices: market separation, price, potency, and accessibility in Amsterdam and San Francisco. International Journal of Drug Policy, 20, 28–37.
Richie, D. (2004). Council restricts medical pot sale. Citrus Heights would still allow the city’s first cannabis
shop to open on Auburn Boulevard. Sacramento Bee, April 18, N1.
Russo, E., Mathre, M., Byrne, A., Velin, R., Bach, P., Sanchez-Ramos, J., and Kirlin, K. (2002). Chronic
cannabis use in the Compassionate Investigational New Drug Program: an examination of benefits and
adverse effects of legal clinical cannabis. Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics, 2(1), 3–57.
Szalavitz, M. (2009). Drugs in Portugal: did decriminalization work? Time, April 26. [Online] Available at:
http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0,8599,1893946,00.html.
Torres, N. (2012). Mexico Marijuana Legalization Bill introduced by lawmaker. Huffington Post,
November 15. [Online] Available at: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/11/15/mexico-marijuanalegalization_n_2140116.html.
WAMM (Wo/men’s Alliance for Medical Marijuana). (2012). About WAMM. [Online] Available at: http://
www.wamm.org/aboutus.php.
Washington State Legislature. (2012). Chapter 69.51A: Medical Cannabis. [Online] Available at: http://
apps.leg.wa.gov/RCW/default.aspx?cite=69.51A
Williams, A. (2012). Legal marijuana debated as Belize joins regional push on drugs. Bloomberg Business
Week, July 17. [Online] Available at: http://www.businessweek.com/news/2012-07-17/legal-marijuanadebated-as-belize-joins-regional-push-on-drugs.
Wouters, M., Benschop, A., van Laar M., and Korf, D. (2012). Cannabis use and proximity to coffee shops
in the Netherlands. European Journal of Criminology, 9, 337–353.

355

Chapter 19

Development of Cannabis-Based
Medicines: Regulatory Hurdles/Routes
in Europe and the United States
Alison Thompson and Verity Langfield

19.1 A new class of medicine: acknowledgment by the

authorities
Following many years of discussion, by physicians and patients, of anecdotal evidence of the benefits of using cannabis in managing many and varied medical conditions, the UK House of Lords set
up a Scientific Committee in 1998. Health professionals, patients, medical scientists, and pharmacists were all called to give evidence on whether cannabis could indeed have a place in medicine.
It became clear that even though nabilone, a synthetic analogue of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) was licensed in the UK in 1982 for prescription-only, hospital-only use against nausea arising from chemotherapy, it was not widely used either for nausea or, for example, multiple sclerosis
(MS). However, patients with MS were particularly supportive of the use of cannabis in some form
for alleviating their MS symptoms (House of Lords 1998).
The House of Lords Committee recommended:
1 Clinical trials of cannabis for the treatment of MS and chronic pain should be mounted as a
matter of urgency.
2 Research should be promoted into alternative modes of administration (e.g., inhalation, sublingual, rectal) which would retain the benefit of rapid absorption offered by smoking, without
the adverse effects.
A medicinal product for which quality, safety, and efficacy data were available would have to be
approved by the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) (then the
Medicines Control Agency) before it could be available as a prescription medicine to patients.
And so the journey of the first pharmaceutical company to develop a truly cannabis-based pharmaceutical product began.

19.2 The development program: assembling the evidence
The extensive documented research and anecdotal evidence on the usefulness of cannabis for
medicinal use would not be sufficient to support its legal use as a medicine. A full pharmaceutical
development program, meeting the stringent conditions laid down in law, would have to be followed before a cannabis-based medicine could be approved and marketed.
Medicines have been controlled in some manner for many centuries. Use of pharmacopoeias began in the sixteenth century. In the nineteenth century, the emerging life sciences supported more sophisticated control of medicines. Poisoning of more than one hundred people

Development of Cannabis-Based Medicines

by diethylene glycol used as a solvent in a medicine in the US resulted in the introduction of
the Federal Food, Drugs and Cosmetic Act in 1938. In the UK, the effect of thalidomide (a hypnotic and sedative) on the human fetus, resulting in deformity, propelled the introduction of a
Committee on Safety of Drugs which began its work in 1964. The European Community introduced a Directive in 1965 (EEC/65/65) laying down the law, regulation, and administrative action
relating to medicinal products.
As the knowledge of, and experience with, medicines increases, the regulatory framework for
controlling them increases in its stringency and complexity.
Different countries (or regions, e.g., European Union) have their own laws for controlling medicine production, sale, and use. In the European Union, Directive 2001/83/EC consolidates many
Directives issued between 1965 and 2001, laying out the law concerning placement of medicines
on the market. Initially, countries or regions developed their own standards and control methods
for medicines. However, with globalization, a common approach emerged for drug development
and control, through written guidance. This common guidance is through the International
Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals
for Human Use (ICH). The European Union, the US, and Japan all participate; other countries
observe and follow (e.g., Canada); others observe, e.g., the World Health Organization.
The ICH guidance describes the collation of evidence of, initially, the quality and safety of a
drug and provision of sufficient reassurance that early studies in humans can be carried out.
19.2.1 Pharmaceutical development

Most medicines have a single main active ingredient that provides the therapeutic action. In the
case of a medicine that has been prepared by extraction from plant material, it is likely that several
of its components are important in its action. Williamson and Evans (2000) observe that, in the
case of cannabis, not all the observed effects can be ascribed to THC, and the other constituents
may also modulate its action; for example, cannabidiol (CBD) reduces anxiety induced by THC.
All the extracted components need to be shown to be consistently controlled during the active
substance and finished product preparation. It also needs to be shown that despite the complexity
of the product, that it is a stable and acceptable formulated medicine. Cannabis sativa L. contains
more than 400 chemical compounds of which more than 100 are cannabinoids (ElSohly and
Slade 2005). Cannabis is very complex in its chemistry due to the vast number of its constituents
and their possible interaction with one another; almost all of the chemical classes, e.g., monoand sesquiterpenes, sugars, hydrocarbons, steroids, flavonoids, nitrogenous compounds, and
amino acids, among others are present (ElSohly and Slade 2005). Although the use of extracted
plant material is challenging as it needs to be standardized for consistency in effect, and simple
medicines do not present this challenge, they may not have the overall therapeutic effect of the
extracted medicine (Williamson and Evans 2000).
As the starting point for an extracted cannabis medicine is the cannabis plant, consistency
demands that plants carefully chosen for their particular cannabinoid levels must be maintained
as a genetically stable population that is always available as the raw material for the medicine.
These plants must be maintained through vegetative propagation and in a pest-free environment.
The cannabinoids in fresh cannabis are present in their acid form (e.g., delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA) and cannabidiolic acid (CBDA)). Raw cannabis must be heated to convert
the cannabinoids to their usefully active forms (e.g., THC and CBD). The heated, dried plants
are then processed (e.g., by liquid carbon dioxide extraction), to produce the extracted “active
substance” which is likely to be a very complex mixture of many plant components, high in cannabinoids. The active substance must then be “formulated” as a medicine.

357

358

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

The bioavailability of cannabinoids administered by the gastrointestinal route is poor unless
accompanied by a lipid carrier, particularly because of a high rate of first-pass metabolism, and is
highly variable between subjects (Pertwee 1999).
In order to reduce the impact of first-pass metabolism, several other routes of administration
are available: pulmonary, nasal, oromucosal, and rectal. A nonsmoked, acceptable oral form,
administrable in small quantities would enable titration to effect. In the case of Sativex® (MHRA
2010; and the Sativex® Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC) (Electronic Medicines
Compendium 2012)), the first whole cannabis-based medicine to be approved in the European
Union, the medicine is a solution to be used as an oromucosal spray. There are two principal cannabinoids in Sativex®, present in an approximately 1:1 ratio (THC, 27 mg/mL, and CBD, 25mg/
mL). It is provided in small vials each with a pump actuator that delivers 100 microliters per spray.
Cannabinoids are virtually insoluble in water, so organic solvents such as ethanol and propylene
glycol are helpful as excipients in the formulation. Ethanol level would have to be below the recommended maximum intake of ethanol within a medicine, including for children. The European
guideline (EMEA/HMPC/85114/2008) provides this guidance.
The specifications that are given for each of the stages of the preparation of a medicine produced using extracted cannabis (botanical raw material, active ingredient, and for the finished
medicine) are likely to be very complex.
They include a measure of the content of principal and other cannabinoids, and of noncannabinoid fractions such as carotenoids. To ensure quality and safety, testing for the presence of
microbes and of substances such as aflatoxin and heavy metals should also be considered. The
development of the analytical methodology for both cannabinoids and noncannabinoids, using
thin-layer chromatography, high-performance liquid chromatography, and gas chromatography
have been crucial in showing the consistency of the medicine in all its stages of manufacture as
well as in supporting the stability testing of the medicine. Hazekamp (2005) describes cannabinoid analytical methodology.
19.2.2 Documenting safety for early studies in humans

Cannabis has, in its various forms, been in widespread use for over 5000 years (see Russo, Chapter 2,
this volume). The effect of the drug in humans is therefore very well documented though the discovery in the late 1980s (Pertwee 2000) of specific cannabinoid receptors gave an impetus to cannabinoid
research. The endogenous cannabinoid system in animals and humans is clearly of major physiological and pharmacological significance.
The House of Lords Science and Technology Report collated evidence on the toxicology of
cannabis in 1998 and summarized the evidence: “the acute toxicity of cannabis and the cannabinoids is very low; no-one has ever died as a direct and immediate consequence of recreational or
medical use; animal studies have shown a very large separation (by a factor of more than 10,000)
between pharmacologically effective and lethal doses.” However, other effects of cannabis need to
be taken into account when developing a cannabis-based medicine. These include the short-term
effect on the heart and vascular system which can lead to significant increases in heart rate and a
lowering of the blood pressure; the short-term “high,” a state of euphoric intoxication, leading to
a slight impairment of psychomotor and cognitive function; in some instances cannabis use may
lead to a longer-lasting toxic psychosis involving delusions and hallucinations that can be misdiagnosed as schizophrenic illness; exacerbation of the symptoms of those already suffering from
schizophrenic illness (though there is little evidence that cannabis use can precipitate schizophrenia or other mental illness in those not already predisposed to it); untoward long-term effects on
cognitive performance, i.e., the performance of the brain, particularly in heavy users. The Report

Development of Cannabis-Based Medicines

notes that animal experiments have shown that cannabinoids cause alterations in both male and
female sexual hormones; but there is no evidence that cannabis adversely affects human fertility,
or that it causes chromosomal or genetic damage; and that the consumption of cannabis by pregnant women may, however, lead to significantly shorter gestation and lower birth-weight babies
in mothers smoking cannabis six or more times a week. The Report also outlines the potential
problems of tolerance and dependence.
The House of Lords summary showed the challenge to medical researchers to produce a
cannabis-­based medicine that either eliminated or massively reduced the negative effects of the
use of cannabinoids, yet ensured benefit.
When a new active substance has been identified, through standard pharmaceutical screening procedures, there will be much to learn about its action(s) and its absorption, distribution,
metabolism, and excretion. ICH lays down the requirements for toxicology testing as a medicine
proceeds in its development program in “Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies for the Conduct
of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorisation for Pharmaceuticals.” This guidance
describes the step-wise approach that must be taken in first carrying out nonclinical studies at
a range of doses and duration to enable choice of an appropriate starting dose in humans. The
effects elicited in the nonclinical studies must provide guidance on the type of adverse clinical
effects that might be seen. Effects that are potentially clinically relevant can be sufficiently characterized using either doses up to the maximum tolerated dose (MTD), doses that achieve large
exposure multiples or doses that use the maximum feasible dose. Acute, subchronic, and chronic
toxicity studies must be carried out step-wise; however, the ICH guidance also encourages the use
of as few test animals as possible.
These early studies give crucial guidance on the amount of active substance that is likely to
provide the required effect. They also begin to inform of the likely safety margin there is between
deleterious and efficacious effect.
Safety pharmacology and pharmacodynamic studies are described in another ICH guidance
(“ICH S7A Guideline: Safety Pharmacology Studies for Human Pharmaceuticals,” November
2000).
The endocannabinoid system and the existence of cannabinoid receptors have been described
elsewhere in this book. So extensive is cannabinoid pharmacology research that the documentation of pharmacology for cannabinoid medicines can, to some extent, rely on the literature, particularly primary pharmacodynamic studies. However, a battery of safety pharmacology studies
must be carried out once the cannabis extract has been fully characterized. The core battery of
safety pharmacology studies includes the assessment of effects on cardiovascular, central nervous system (CNS), and respiratory systems and should generally be conducted before human
exposure.
Information on pharmacokinetics (PK) (e.g., absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion) in laboratory animals must be available and studies must be carried out to identify potential
drug interactions before large groups of human subjects are exposed. The literature on the PK of
cannabinoids is extensive. The PK profile of THC administered intravenously (i.v.) was examined
in dogs by Garrett and Hunt (1977), in rabbits by Leuschner et al. (1986), and in Large White
pigs by Brunet et al. (2006). Uptake following oral administration of THC is erratic because of
degradation of the drug by stomach acids and extensive first-pass metabolism (Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), Marinol Summary Basis of Approval (SBA), 1985) however, absorption of THC following sublingual mucosal administration increases plasma bioavailability relative to oral administration due to the avoidance of first-pass metabolism. Mannila et al. (2006)
explored the comparative bioavailabilities of THC after sublingual administration of a solid

359

360

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

THC/β-cyclodextrin complex, oral administration of an ethanolic THC solution and i.v. administration of an aqueous THC solution. The plasma profiles of THC after i.v. administration implied
first-order PK with an elimination half-life of 66.6 ± 3.1 min. The absolute bioavailability (F) of
THC after sublingual administration was higher than after oral administration; F = 16.0 ± 7.5%
compared to F = 1.3 ± 1.4% respectively, a result most likely due to the avoidance of first-pass
metabolism in the case of sublingual administration.
Huestis (2005) has reviewed the PK of plant cannabinoids and interpreted the cannabinoid
concentrations in biological fluids.
The PK profiles of CBD were studied in dogs (Samara et al. 1988) and rats (Siemens et al. 1980)
following i.v. and oral administration. In rats, CBD was absorbed and distributed into tissues very
rapidly. Terminal half-lives after i.v. and oral administration were found to be about 11 h (Siemens
et al. 1980). In dogs, CBD administered i.v. was also rapidly absorbed into tissues and plasma
levels declined in a triphasic fashion with mean terminal half-lives ranging from 7–9 h. In three
of six dogs administered CBD orally, CBD could not be detected in the plasma. In the other three,
the oral bioavailability ranged from 13% to 19%. The results of this study show that CBD has low
bioavailability after oral administration to dogs and this has been attributed to extensive first-pass
hepatic metabolism (Samara et al. 1988).
Due to the extensive cannabinoid pharmacology and PK literature, it is unlikely that extensive
development work would be required in this respect for a new cannabinoid medicine.
19.2.3 Phase 1 and Phase 2 studies

“First-in-human” or Phase 1 clinical studies can only be undertaken when there is sufficient reassurance from early short-term toxicology studies with the test active substance, and from a knowledge of the active substance pharmacology, that under the restricted and controlled conditions of
a Phase 1 study, the active substance will not be harmful. Further than that, it must be justifiable,
based on the current evidence, to undertake the study. Phase 1 studies are carried out in healthy
volunteers and seek to establish the pharmacokinetic profile and tolerability of a proposed new
medicine. Very early Phase 1 studies may compare different formulations using the same active
substance but different excipients. They may compare different modes of administration. They
will provide information on the appropriate dose range which can then be used in planning the
first studies in patients with the target indication.
Due to the known CNS effects of smoked cannabis, first-in-human studies with cannabinoid
medicines are likely to be cautious. A highly characterized, consistent medicinal product will be
needed to ensure successful Phase 1 studies that provide the required pharmacokinetic data.
While the Phase 2 studies are being planned (having been informed by the Phase 1 studies) and
started, some further Phase 1 studies might be carried out on extrinsic factors such as drug/food
interaction and interaction with other specified medicines. A study in healthy volunteers to assess
the cardiovascular effects of multiple doses of the active substance may be required. Drug abuse
potential studies are mandatory in some countries (e.g., US). The US FDA also requires studies
of the effect of the medicine on certain aspects of heart activity and dedicated studies in humans
with hepatic impairment before New Drug Application (NDA) approval.
19.2.4 Obtaining approval for carrying out clinical trials

In the European Union, a Clinical Trial Application (CTA) must be made to each individual country, though the process is based on a harmonized set of documents and a common
form—the EudraCT form. A CTA consists of an application form, the protocol, an Investigator

Development of Cannabis-Based Medicines

Brochure (IB) summarizing the quality, safety, and clinical information (if any) so far, the
investigational medicinal product (IMP) dossier (IMPD), which is a precursor to a full quality
section described later in section 19.3.1, and a copy of the authorization of the IMP manufacturer to prepare the IMP. In addition, a justification or risk:benefit review of the proposal may
be needed.
In the US, usually following a formal “pre-IND” meeting with the FDA, the regulatory process
towards approval of a medicine begins with an “Investigational New Drug” (IND) submission.
The IND consists of a general investigational plan (for product development), the IB, protocol(s),
a comprehensive “chemistry, manufacture, and controls” section (which, again, is a precursor to a
full quality section described later in section 19.3.1), pharmacology/toxicology data, a summary
of previous human experience and any additional relevant information. Once the IND has been
submitted to the FDA and approval of an Institutional Review Board (as for Ethics Committee
review in the UK) has been received, then 30 days after receipt by the FDA of the IND, it is permissible to start the proposed clinical trial.
19.2.5 Controlled drug specific requirements

In the case of cannabinoid IMPs, not only the legislation concerning clinical trials must be adhered
to, but also the laws governing drugs that might potentially be abused.
An IMP derived from Cannabis sativa L. and containing cannabinoids is a controlled drug
under international law. In the case of cannabis extracts and tinctures, the movement of these
across international borders is governed by the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs
(International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) Yellow list).
Under the Single Convention, cannabis extracts and tinctures are listed in Schedule I, the
schedule that applies to most prescription narcotic drugs.
The 1961 Single Convention stresses that the use of psychoactive substances for legitimate
medical and scientific purposes is indispensable and their availability for such purposes should
not be unduly restricted. National Authorities are thereby encouraged to accept that such IMPs
may be useful and that they can be legally marketed once the Authorities have been provided with
all the evidence and the medicine is approved.
However, local national law and its implementation of international law will vary considerably. There will be rules governing the import, possession, movement, and storage of medicines
that are also controlled drugs. It is possible that a medicine that is a controlled drug cannot be
imported unless it would serve an unmet medical need.
In the UK, cannabis is regulated under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971; Schedule 2 to the Act
classifies cannabis itself, and cannabis resin, as Class B controlled drugs. The position in practice
is therefore that cannabis and most of its derivatives may not be used in medicine, and may be
possessed for research only under Home Office license. Therefore, Home Office licences must be
obtained prior to any activity involving growing of cannabis, manufacturing an IMP, distributing
the IMP, and use at research centers by subjects.
19.2.6 The evidence of efficacy

The House of Lords Report lists the many conditions that physicians and patients felt were alleviated by the use of cannabis either smoked or taken orally. These included MS, spinal injury, back
pain, arthritis, epilepsy, myalgic encephalomyelitis, pain, antiemetic after chemotherapy, cerebral
palsy, and glaucoma.

361

362

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

The Report documents a statement made on July 2, 1997 by Tessa Jowell MP, the then-Minister
of State for Health: “At present the evidence is inconclusive. The key point is that a cannabis-based
medicine has not been scientifically demonstrated to be safe, efficacious and of suitable quality.”

19.3 The Marketing Authorisation Application
All the data produced during a medicine’s development is assembled as an internationally accepted set of evidence called the Common Technical Document (CTD). Each country or region may
also have additional guidance that must be followed in order to prepare the collated evidence (the
Marketing Authorisation Application (MAA)) that must be submitted to the local authority for
approval before a drug can be marketed.
19.3.1 Documenting quality (chemistry, manufacturing, and controls)

The quality section of a pharmaceutical dossier consists of two main parts: information about the
active substance and about the finished product. The aim of the development process is to produce a consistent product that reliably performs as intended. A typical pharmaceutical will consist
of the active substance, teamed with appropriate excipients to result in a medicine that is both stable in storage and, when taken by the patient, performs the necessary function and is bioavailable.
Cannabinoid medicines that are based only on delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol are typically
simple preparations of only THC and excipients in an acceptable medicinal form (e.g., a capsule).
However, a medicine that reflected “whole cannabis” would be an enormous project due to the
complex nature of a whole plant.
In the European Union a new Directive, “Directive 2004/24/EC of the European Parliament and
of the Council amending, as regards traditional herbal medicinal products, Directive 2001/83/EC
on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use” describes herbal products. It allows for a simplified procedure to be followed “where the applicant can demonstrate
by detailed references to published scientific literature that the constituent or the constituents of
the medicinal product has or have a well-established medicinal use with recognized efficacy and
an acceptable level of safety within the meaning of Directive 2001/83/EC, he/she should not be
required to provide the results of preclinical tests or the results of clinical trials.”
However, although a medicine derived from cannabis might be described as herbal, the fact
that it would not have “well-established medicinal use” would mean that it would not fall within
this Directive. In the US, the FDA has produced a draft “botanical guidance” (FDA 2004), which
similarly calls for a herbal medicine to have had a “marketing history” for a simplified procedure
for approval to be used.
For a medicine derived from cannabis to be made available, it would not only have to be manufactured in a controlled manner, but unlike a traditional “herbal” medicine, a complete program
of safety testing and clinical trials would have to be undertaken.
The chemistry, manufacture, and controls for both the active substance and for the finished
product (the medicine) require extensive work that provides documented evidence on the following matters:
Active substance: chemical structure, general properties, control of starting materials, manufacturing process, detailed description of the active substance, analytical procedures, validation
of analytical procedures, batch data, description of the reference standards used in the analytical
methods, container description, and stability.

Development of Cannabis-Based Medicines

Finished product: description and composition, pharmaceutical development, manufacture
process, the specification for identification and control purposes, analytical procedures (and their
validation), batch analyses, reference standards, container, and stability.
19.3.2 The MAA: nonclinical studies—safety testing

In the case of cannabinoids, there is much information in the literature on the nonclinical pharmacology. It is therefore unlikely that a full preclinical pharmacology program would need to be
undertaken as so much reference can be made to the literature. However, pharmacology studies
that are models for the proposed indication are likely to be necessary to support a MAA.
However, when it comes to toxicology, that is a different matter. As has already been mentioned,
to ensure that a cannabis extract acts consistently, there must be a detailed, highly characterized
specification for the active substance (cannabis extract). The full program of toxicology testing
must be undertaken once the required active substance has been characterized and is known to
be consistent batch after batch. The full program includes safety pharmacology to investigate the
effects of the test substance on the CNS, the cardiovascular, and the respiratory systems. As far
as absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion studies are concerned, for cannabinoids,
the literature is likely to indicate whether there are any particular concerns that may be specific
to particular cannabinoids. Investigations into the effects of cannabinoids on cytochrome P450
enzymes are informative. With nonclinical studies, another set of validated analytical methods
must be developed to investigate the test material levels in plasma and tissue in the test species.
The following toxicology studies would be required to provide sufficient toxicological and
pharmacokinetic data to provide the reassurance of safety required for a MAA:
◆
◆

Single and repeat dose studies.
In vitro genotoxicology studies: e.g., bacterial reverse mutation test (Ames test) and mouse
lymphoma studies.

◆

In vivo gentoxicology studies: e.g., micronucleus test and unscheduled DNA synthesis.

◆

Two-year carcinogenicity study.

◆

Reproductive studies to cover fertility and early embryonic development, embryo-fetal development, and prenatal and postnatal development including maternal function.

19.3.3 The MAA: discussion with the national authorities

and clinical data

As has been stated, ICH provides comprehensive guidance on what studies need to be undertaken and
what information needs to be provided to the Authorities in a MAA before a medicine can be placed
on the market. Regional authorities (e.g., European Medicines Agency (EMA)) or national (e.g., the
US FDA) can be approached for scientific guidance meetings to ensure that the product developmental plan is likely to provide the data expected in the MAA. The timing of the meetings and the need
for meetings with the Authorities depends on the type of product (e.g., established active ingredient or
novel), the indication, and whether there is an established methodology for investigation.
In the European Union, although it is possible to request meetings with the authorities in individual Member States (e.g., the MHRA in the UK), as it is likely that the product will be marketed
in several European Union countries, it is advisable to request scientific advice through the EMA.
This is particularly true for advice on clinical protocols, where a consensus is important for future
Europe-wide success.

363

364

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

In the US, the development, submission, review, and approval process can be guided each step
of the way by the FDA. Contact with the FDA usually starts with a “Pre-Investigational New
Drug” meeting within the FDA. This is the opportunity for the company to present the product
and development plan to the FDA and receive initial opinions and guidance. The part of the
FDA that is involved in reviewing and approving drugs is the Center of Drug Evaluation and
Research (CDER). CDER is divided into “Offices,” e.g., the Office of Pharmaceutical Science. Each
“Office” may have several Divisions with different specialities, e.g., the Division of Pharmaceutical
Analysis, the Division of Neurology products. When meeting with the FDA, it is likely that FDA
expertise from several Divisions will be assembled to provide guidance.
19.3.4 MAA preparation

Once all the quality, safety, and the proof of efficacy data is available, the MAA can be assembled.
ICH describes the international CTD dossier for provision to global authorities. The CTD consists of three levels: Modules 3, 4, and 5 (Quality, Nonclinical, and Clinical documentation respectively) are at the bottom of the “pyramid.” Above this are Module 2.2 (CTD Summary), Module
2.3 (Quality Overall Summary), Modules 2.4 and 2.6 (Nonclinical Overview and Summaries), and
Modules 2.5 and 2.7 (Clinical Overview and Summaries). Module 2 summarizes all the information in Modules 3, 4, and 5.
At the top of the pyramid is Module 1 (country or regional) containing local administrative
information, local Product Information, information about the experts (authors of the overviews), pharmacovigilance summaries, information on studies in the pediatric population and
any other country or region-specific information.
The local Product Information provides the guidance to the treating physician in summarizing
all the information relevant to the safe and beneficial treatment of the patient and the culmination
of the many years for development of the medicinal product.
The final step, of course, is a review by the national authority to determine if there is sufficient
evidence of quality, safety, and efficacy and that a positive benefit:risk decision can be made and
the medicine can be approved.

19.4 Regulatory aspects of the clinical development of Sativex®

as a medicine
Following the Phase 1 clinical trials in healthy subjects, the IMP can be used in studies with
patients who have the condition for which it is hoped the IMP will be helpful. There is considerable guidance from the EMA and from the US FDA on how to carry out the clinical trials given
on their websites.
Phase 2 trials are usually with hundreds of patients, during which early proof of efficacy and
the likely dose requirement is sought. Phase 3 studies, usually with thousands of patients, is when
efficacy is hopefully proven and the safety profile of the IMP better understood.
As shown by the House of Lords Report, and not surprisingly given the existence of the endocannabinoid system, the variety and extent of conditions for which medicinal cannabis might be
used is enormous.
The House of Lords Report had concluded: “Clinical trials of cannabis for the treatment of MS
and chronic pain should be mounted as a matter of urgency.” GW Pharma Ltd. focused on this as
a starting point for clinical development in these conditions.

Development of Cannabis-Based Medicines

19.4.1 Clinical trials with Sativex® in pain

Some of the earliest clinical trials with cannabis-based medicines, including Sativex ® were performed by Wade et al. (2003, 2004). Wade et al. (2003) reported a consecutive series of double
blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, single-patient, cross-over trials with 2-week treatment
periods with 24 patients with MS, four with spinal cord injury, one with brachial plexus damage,
and one with limb amputation due to neurofibromatosis. Patients self-titrated with Sativex®, THC
extract, CBD extract, or placebo. The results were encouraging, showing that cannabis extracts
improved neurogenic symptoms unresponsive to standard treatments and that unwanted effects
were predictable and generally well tolerated.
The objective of the study reported by Wade et al. (2004) was to determine whether a cannabisbased medicinal extract (CBME) benefits a range of symptoms due to MS. The primary objective
of the study was to investigate the use of Sativex® compared with placebo in the alleviation of key
symptoms of MS (pain, spasticity, spasms, bladder problems, tremor) in subjects with MS. At the
time of inclusion in the study, subjects were asked to identify their single primary target symptom
from among the five symptoms listed. A total of 160 patients were randomized in this multicenter,
6-week parallel group study and given either Sativex® or placebo. The primary objective of the
study was achieved by comparing the change from baseline in the severity of the primary symptom after 6 weeks of therapy on Sativex®, with that on placebo. The severity scores were recorded
using a 0–100 mm visual analogue scale (VAS), completed at the clinic visits, and also by subjects
in a daily diary. For the primary endpoint of the study, the primary symptom score changes were
aggregated across the entire study population. A secondary analysis looked at each of the five
symptoms separately. The maximum permitted dose of study medication was eight actuations
(21.6 mg THC and 20.0 mg CBD) in any 3 h period, and 48 actuations (129.6 mg THC and 120 mg
CBD) in any 24 h period. Subjects titrated to their optimal dose based on efficacy, tolerability, and
the maximum permitted dose. The adjusted mean change from baseline for the composite primary impairment VAS score at the end of Part 1 showed a decrease of 25.29 mm for the Sativex®
treatment group and 19.35 mm for the placebo group. The estimated treatment difference did not
reach statistical significance (p = 0.124; 95% confidence interval (CI): –13.52, 1.65 mm).
However, the treatment difference of 22.79 mm in the 39 subjects who recorded spasticity as
their primary impairment was statistically significant in favor of the Sativex ® treatment group
(p = 0.001; 95% CI: −35.52, −10.07 mm). A responder analysis of those subjects with a 30% or
greater improvement in primary spasticity symptoms (measured by diary card) found an odds
ratio of 7.20 (p = 0.029) in favor of Sativex® treatment. The efficacy data indicated positive effects
for spasticity in MS.
Berman et al. (2004) investigated the effectiveness of cannabis-based medicines including
Sativex®, for the treatment of chronic pain associated with brachial plexus root avulsion. A reason
for choosing this patient population is that they are an unusually homogeneous group in terms
of anatomical location of injury, pain descriptions, and demographics; they therefore represent
an excellent human model of central neuropathic pain. In this study, patients were given either
placebo, Sativex®, or a cannabis extract containing mainly THC. Patients were allowed to titrate
freely within the following limits according to subjective symptom relief and adverse events.
The maximum permitted dose was eight sprays into the mouth (THC 21.6 mg or THC 21.6 mg/
CBD 20 mg or placebo) at any one time or within a 3 h period and 48 sprays within any 24 h
period. A self-titration dosing schedule was chosen for several reasons; data from human volunteer studies showed a high intersubject variability in the bioavailability of Sativex®; self-titration
enabled patients, most of whom were working and driving, to achieve their individual optimum

365

366

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

therapeutic dose by balancing any analgesia against possible side effects and allowing them to
vary the dose depending on their levels of pain, and to fit in with their lifestyle. The primary
outcome measure was the mean pain severity score during the last 7 days of treatment. Secondary
measures included pain-related quality of life assessments. The primary measure failed to fall by
the two points defined in the proposed hypothesis. However, both this measure and measures of
sleep showed statistically significant improvements. Eighty percent of the patients considered the
study drugs of sufficient benefit to warrant continuing into an open-extension study. This put into
context the clinical relevance of the modest drop in pain scores in a condition that is long-lasting,
difficult to treat, and that had already proven refractory to the standard methods of treatment by
both nerve repair and oral analgesics.
Nurmikko et al. (2007) investigated the effect of Sativex® on the severity of pain and allodynia
and associated sleep disturbance, mental distress, and disability in patients with peripheral neuropathic pain, saying that there is a well-recognized need for better pain relief than is currently
available. Sixty-three patients were randomized to take Sativex® and 62 placebo in this 5-week
trial. Concomitant analgesia was maintained at a stable dosage regimen for the duration of the
study. A self-titration regimen was used to optimize drug administration. The mean reduction
in pain intensity scores was greater in patients receiving Sativex® than placebo (mean adjusted
scores −1.48 points versus −0.52 points on a 0–10 numeric rating scale (NRS); p = 0.004; 95%
CI: −1.59, 0.32). Improvements in Neuropathic Pain Scale composite score (p = 0.007), sleep
NRS (p = 0.001), dynamic allodynia (p = 0.042), punctate allodynia (p = 0.021), Pain Disability
Index (p = 0.003), and Patients’ Global Impression of Change (p <0.001) were similarly greater on
Sativex® vs. placebo. This study demonstrated that Sativex® is effective in the relief of peripheral
neuropathic pain when given in addition to existing medication. Greater than 30% improvement
in pain intensity, generally considered as clinically meaningful, was reported by 26% of subjects
receiving Sativex® compared with 15% of patients taking placebo. When patients entered the
study, they had not been experiencing any benefit from their existing treatment so pain reduction
following Sativex® was particularly encouraging. Once titrated to effect, patients did not increase
their Sativex® dose, even though they were free to do so; and nor did those patients who entered
the 52-week open-extension study.
Rog et al. (2005) reported a 5-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled parallel
group study in 66 adult patients with central neuropathic pain syndromes due to MS. Central
pain for which a nociceptive cause appeared unlikely was required to be of at least 3 months’
duration and expected to remain otherwise stable during the study. A stable neuropathic pain
medication regimen was maintained during the 2 weeks immediately before screening and
throughout the study. Pain and sleep were recorded daily on an 11-point NRS. Cannabis-based
medicine (Sativex®) was superior to placebo in reducing the mean intensity of pain (Sativex® mean
change −2.7, 95% CI: −3.4, −2.0; placebo −1.4, 95% CI: −2.0, −0.8, comparison between groups,
p = 0.005) and sleep disturbance (Sativex® mean change −2.5, 95% CI: −3.4, −1.7; placebo −0.8,
95% CI: −1.5, −0.1, comparison between groups, p = 0.003). It was concluded that Sativex® was
effective in reducing pain and sleep disturbance in patients with multiple sclerosis-related central
neuropathic pain and is mostly well tolerated.
As can be seen from the studies outlined, these early clinical studies with Sativex ® confirmed
the range of clinical conditions that might be eased by cannabinoids. An early submission by GW
Pharma Ltd. of efficacy data on Sativex® to the UK Authorities led to the publication of a Public
Assessment Report summarizing that although results were encouraging, that there was insufficient proof of efficacy in a well-defined indication, to support a Marketing Authorisation (MA).

Development of Cannabis-Based Medicines

The encouraging results for the relief of spasticity in MS led GW Pharma Ltd. to focus further
clinical trials on this condition in order to assemble sufficient efficacy data to support a MA.
However, in the meantime, a MA was sought in Canada. Health Canada support a system where
“promising medicines that meet unmet medical need” may be authorized if there are sufficient
quality and safety data, though the clinical data are positive, but not the full set normally required
for a submission. Such an approval is termed a “Notification of Compliance with Conditions.” The
use of Sativex® for the relief of neuropathic pain in MS was just such a case. Health Canada gave
the first ever approval for a cannabis-based medicine, Sativex®, in April 2005. This was not only
important to patients in Canada, but also to patients globally where a national authority, if the
local legislation permitted, was able to refer to this approval in Canada and then support supply
of its own patients where the patient’s physician requested such treatment.
19.4.2 Clinical trials with Sativex® in MS

Typically, two positive clinical studies in the specified indication are required to provide evidence
of efficacy in a MA application (MAA). Further studies were carried out with Sativex® specifically
in patients with spasticity in MS.
Collin et al. (2007) reported a double blind, randomized, parallel group comparison of Sativex®
with placebo in the treatment of spasticity associated with MS, involving 189 subjects with a postrandomization treatment period of 6 weeks. Patients had a clinical diagnosis of MS with spasticity
not wholly relieved by their current therapy, experienced at least 3 months’ stable disease prior to
study entry, and had significant spasticity in at least two muscle groups defined as a score of two
or more on the Ashworth Scale (where zero represents no increase in muscle tone and four represents limb rigid in flexion or extension). Subjects continued to take their antispasticity medication
during the study, but were required to maintain a stable dose meaning that any improvement seen
on the study was in addition to that already obtained on concomitant antispasticity medication.
The primary efficacy analysis was the comparison of the change from baseline in the severity
of spasticity between the Sativex® and placebo treatment groups, as assessed by an 11-point NRS
score for spasticity. In addition, responder analyses were performed. Of the 189 randomized
subjects, 124 were in the Sativex® treatment group and 65 were in the placebo treatment group.
The adjusted mean change in NRS scores for spasticity for the Sativex® treatment group at the
end of treatment was 1.18 points from a mean baseline period score of 5.49 points. For the corresponding period, the placebo group showed an adjusted mean decrease of 0.59 points from
a mean baseline period score of 5.39 points. The estimated treatment difference of 0.52 points,
in favor of the Sativex® treatment group was statistically significant (p = 0.048; 95% CI: −1.029,
−0.004).
The responder analysis showed that in the Sativex® group 48 (40.0%) patients had a ≥30%
reduction in NRS spasticity over the study as compared to 14 (21.9%) on placebo (difference in
favor of Sativex® = 18.1%; 95% CI: 4.73, 31.52; p = 0.014). The change in Motricity Index score
for affected legs from baseline to end of treatment (Visit 4) showed a treatment difference of 3.86
points in favor of Sativex®, which approached statistical significance (p = 0.054). There was an
improvement in Ashworth score in the Sativex® population from a baseline score of 2.41 to a final
visit score of 1.77; the placebo group improved from 2.44 to 1.92, however, the difference of 0.11
units in favor of Sativex® was not statistically significant.
This study has shown, via the primary efficacy analysis of the NRS spasticity scores, that
Sativex® is an effective treatment in relieving spasticity in subjects with MS, who have failed to
respond adequately to existing treatments. Of additional note in the interpretation of this study is

367

368

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

the observation that more than 90% of subjects in both treatment groups were taking concomitant
medication, which remained at a stable dose during the study. Thus the improvements seen on
Sativex® are providing a benefit which was otherwise unavailable to these subjects.
Collin et al. (2010) reported a further double blind, randomized, placebo controlled, parallel
group study, with a post randomization treatment period of 14 weeks, to evaluate the efficacy of
Sativex® in subjects with symptoms of spasticity due to MS. Patients had at least a 3-month history
of spasticity due to MS which was not wholly relieved with current therapy and they remained
on their current therapy throughout the study. A total of 337 subjects were randomized and analyzed; 167 received Sativex® and 170 received placebo. Analysis of the change from baseline of the
adjusted mean NRS spasticity scores for Sativex® showed a treatment difference of –0.23 points in
favor of Sativex® that did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.219; 95% CI: −0.59, 0.14 points).
However, a responder analysis in the per protocol (PP) set showed that 36% of subjects achieved
at least a 30% improvement in spasticity NRS with an odds ratio of 1.74 (p = 0.040; 95% CI: 1.024,
2.960). Additional retrospective analysis suggested that the large difference in mean doses of
study medication taken by the study groups may have been a significant contributor to the large
placebo effect seen in this study.
The two studies just described were combined in a preplanned pooled analysis, which showed
that Sativex® was statistically significantly superior to placebo for the change in spasticity NRS,
for a responder analysis and for Subject Global Impression of Change (SGIC). These studies also
showed, in post hoc analyses, that the response to treatment after 4 weeks was highly predictive
of the response in longer-term treatment. These analyses suggested that a suitable approach to
treatment with Sativex® was the “therapeutic trial” approach, in which subjects are first exposed
to treatment, and their ability to respond determined. Subsequently, only those subjects who have
shown the ability to respond are then randomized to the double-blind, placebo-controlled phase
of the study.
The two studies described, along with the meta-analysis, were reviewed by the UK Authorities
as the “Reference Member State” during a Decentralised Procedure. The concept of “responders” to Sativex® was also discussed with the Authorities during this procedure and it was decided
that the Sativex® MAA would be withdrawn and a further study carried out that incorporated a
4-week therapeutic trial.
The study design for a further study was based on scientific advice from the National Competent
Authorities in the UK and in Spain. Novotna et al. (2011) describes the two-phase Phase 3 study
of the safety and efficacy of Sativex ®, in the symptomatic relief of spasticity in subjects with
spasticity due to multiple sclerosis where Phase A was a single-blind response assessment and
Phase B was a double blind, randomized, placebo controlled, parallel group study. Patients had
been diagnosed with any disease subtype of MS of at least 6 months’ duration and with at least
moderate spasticity of at least 3 months’ duration, which was not adequately relieved with current
antispasticity therapy. Patients maintained their antispasticity and disease-modifying therapy at a
stable dose throughout the study. Patients entered a single blind, 4-week period of treatment with
Sativex®. At the end of 4 weeks, those subjects who achieved at least a 20% improvement on the
NRS were randomized to either Sativex® or placebo, maintaining the same dose they were taking
at the end of Phase A. Five hundred and seventy-two patients enrolled in the study, 272 patients
achieved a ≥20% improvement after 4 weeks of single-blind treatment and 241 were randomized
(as not all were eligible, for other reasons, to continue). The primary endpoint of the difference
between treatments in the mean spasticity NRS in Phase B showed a highly significant difference
in favor of Sativex® (p = 0.0002). Most secondary endpoints were also significantly in favor of
Sativex®.

Development of Cannabis-Based Medicines

This study design enabled those patients who could be helped by Sativex® to be identified. This
approach was carried through to the SmPC for Sativex® (Electronic Medicines Compendium
2012) where the indication is:

®

Sativex is indicated as treatment for symptom improvement in adult patients with moderate to severe
spasticity due to multiple sclerosis (MS) who have not responded adequately to other anti-spasticity
medication and who demonstrate clinically significant improvement in spasticity related symptoms during an initial trial of therapy.

19.4.3 Long-term efficacy

In addition to all the studies already outlined, most studies were followed up by patients being
able to enter an open-label, long-term safety extension. These have been summarized by Wade et
al. (2006), Rog et al. (2007), and Serpell et al. (2013). However, for the MAA, a placebo controlled,
parallel group, randomized withdrawal study of patients with symptoms of spasticity due to MS
who are receiving long-term Sativex® was carried out (Notcutt et al. 2012). Patients who were
already taking Sativex® for the relief of spasticity entered a 1-week period during which their
spasticity was assessed. They were then randomized to either Sativex® or placebo for 28 days.
Thirty-six patients were randomized. The patients had been using Sativex® for a mean duration
of 3.6 years, and were taking a mean daily dose of 8.25 sprays of Sativex®. The primary outcome of
time to treatment failure was significantly in favor of Sativex® (p = 0.013). Amongst the secondary endpoints, Subject’s Global Impression of Change and the Carer Global Impression of Change
of Functional Ability were significantly in favor of Sativex®. This study provided the necessary
confirmatory evidence that Sativex® provides long-term benefit.
19.4.4 Validity of the NRS in assessing spasticity in MS

During the development of Sativex® it became clear that existing measures of spasticity were
not sufficiently robust or clinically relevant. Therefore results obtained in the early studies with
Sativex® that used the NRS were used to assess the validity of this scale as a measure of spasticity
(Farrar et al. 2008). In addition, evidence was provided by Anwar and Barnes (2009). The MHRA
in the Public Assessment Report (PAR) of Sativex® concluded (MHRA 2010):
the company has provided reasonable demonstration of the validity of the NRS as a measure of symptoms related to spasticity for the purpose of supporting an indication for the symptomatic treatment of
spasticity in this patient population.

19.4.5 Blinding of study medication

It had been suggested that cannabis-based medicines would be recognized in clinical trials by subjects that had previously used cannabis. However, although the psychoactive cannabinoid THC
in Sativex® is also in street cannabis, Sativex® is not the same as smoked/inhaled street cannabis.
Sativex® is an oromucosal spray of consistent content and has a very different pharmacokinetic
profile to street cannabis. It also contains the nonpsychoactive cannabinoid, CBD. Plasma levels
of THC increase much more when it is inhaled in smoke than when Sativex ® is sprayed into
the mouth (MHRA Public Assessment Report 2010, p. 12), indicating the different potential
that smoked cannabis and oromucosal Sativex® have for inducing psychoactivity and therefore
unblinding during a clinical trial. In the long-term Sativex ® study reported by Wade (2006),
patient-reported intoxication scores were consistently low throughout the study.

369

370

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Assessments of mood would help to indicate if there had been unblinding in studies. In the
studies described earlier (Novotna et al. 2011; Wade et al. 2004), there were no statistically significant or clinically relevant differences between the Beck Depression Index scores for Sativex®- and
placebo-treated patients. In the studies described by Collin et al. (2010) and Novotna et al. (2011)
there were no statistically significant or clinically relevant Sativex ®-placebo differences in the
change in subject-recorded anxiety depression scale from the EuroQol 5-D (EQ-5D) health status.
In the study described by Rog et al. (2005) there was no evidence of widespread or substantial
changes in anxiety or depression ratings in subjects with MS taking Sativex® compared with those
taking placebo.
When reviewing the assembled efficacy data, the MHRA summarized in the PAR (2010):
The presented analyses are not able to refute the possibility of bias arising as a result but at least there is
no evidence of a major problem. The smaller the differences between active and placebo, the greater is
the concern that a relevant contribution of that apparent difference may not be real. This still needs to
be considered in the overall evidence of efficacy but if a compelling treatment effect can be shown the
possibility of unblinding might not represent a major concern.

The two most recent studies with Sativex® in patients with spasticity in MS did indeed show a
compelling treatment effect, thus the possibility of unblinding was of no concern.
19.4.6 Evidence of safety

In accordance with international guidance (ICH) all adverse events experienced by subjects
during all clinical trials were recorded, collated, reviewed, and reported to all authorities where
clinical trials were being carried out. All safety data were summarized in the Sativex® Investigator
Brochure provided to all Investigators carrying out clinical trials with Sativex ®. The safety profile for Sativex® was established during the early years of clinical trials. Once the product was
approved and marketed, a Periodic Safety Update Report was prepared every 6 months starting
with the first one submitted to Health Canada at 8 months after the “international birth date” for
Sativex® of April 15, 2005. The Sativex® SPC summarizes the safety profile of Sativex®.
For controlled drugs, it is likely that studies that provide a thorough understanding of the abuse
potential of a new medicine will be required. An abuse liability study carried out with Sativex® is
described by Schoedel et al. (2011).

19.5 Conclusions
The development of any new medicine presents great challenges in the production and documentation of sufficient quality, safety, and efficacy data that show a positive benefit:risk ratio for the
new medicine. However, for a complex botanical medicine the challenge in showing consistency
and repeatability is far greater. The development and authorization of Sativex® in over 20 countries has shown that a cannabis-based medicine is beneficial in healthcare.

References
Anwar, K. and Barnes, M. (2009). A pilot study of a comparison between a patient scored numeric rating scale and clinician scored measures of spasticity in multiple sclerosis. NeuroRehabilitation, 24(4),
333–340.
Berman, J.S., Symonds, C., and Birch, R. (2004). Efficacy of two cannabis based medicinal extracts for
relief of central neuropathic pain from brachial plexus avulsion: results of a randomised controlled trial.
Pain, 112, 299–306.

Development of Cannabis-Based Medicines

Brunet, B., Doucet, C., Venisse, N., et al. (2006). Validation of the Large White Pig as an animal model for
the study of cannabinoids metabolism: application to the study of THC distribution in tissues. Forensic
Science International, 161, 169–174.
Collin, C., Davies, P., Mutiboko, I.K., and Ratcliffe, S. (2007). Randomized controlled trial of cannabisbased medicine in spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis. European Journal of Neurology, 14, 290–296.
Collin, C., Ehler, E., Waberzinek, G., et al. (2010). A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel group study of Sativex, in subjects with symptoms of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis. Neurological
Research, 32, 451–459.
Electronic Medicines Compendium. (2012). Sativex Summary of Product Characteristics. Available at:
http://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/.
ElSohly, M.A. and Slade, D. (2005). Chemical constituents of marijuana: the complex mixture of natural
cannabinoids. Life Sciences, 78(5), 539–548.
Farrar, J.T., Troxel, A.B., Stott, C., Duncombe, P., and Jensen, M.P. (2008). Validity, reliability and clinical
importance of change in a 0-10 numeric rating scale measure of spasticity: a post hoc analysis of a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Clinical Therapeutics, 30(5), 974–985.
Food and Drug Administration. (2004). Guidance for Industry, Botanical Drug Products. Washington, DC:
US Department of Health and Human Services.
Garrett, E.R. and Hunt, C.A. (1977). Pharmacokinetics of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in dogs. Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 66(3), 395–407.
Hazekamp, A., Giroud, C., Peltenburg, A., and Verpoorte, R. (2005). Chromatographic and Spectroscopic
data of cannabinoids from Cannabis sativa. Journal of Liquid Chromatography and Related Technologies,
28(15), 2361–2382.
House of Lords. (1998). Science and Technology; Cannabis – the Scientific Evidence; Session 1997–98, Ninth
Report. London: HMSO.
Huestis, M.A. (2005). Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of the plant cannabinoids Δ-9 tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and cannabinol. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, 168, 657–690.
Leuschner, J.T.A., Harvey, D.J., Bullingham, R.E.S., and Paton, W.D.M. (1986). Pharmacokinetics of
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in rabbits following single or multiple intravenous doses. Drug Metabolism
and Disposition, 14(2), 230–238.
Mannila, J., Jarvinen, T., and Jarvinen, K. (2006). Sublingual administration of Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol/
Beta-cyclodextrin complex increase the bioavailability of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in rabbits. Life
Sciences, 78, 1911–1914.
MHRA Public Assessment Report. (2010). Decentralised Procedure, Sativex Oromucosal Spray,
UK/H/2462/001/DC, UK licence no: PL 18024/0009, GW Pharma Ltd. London: MHRA.
Notcutt, W., Langford, R., Davies, P., Ratcliffe, S., and Potts, R. (2012). A placebo-controlled, parallelgroup, randomized withdrawal study of subjects with symptoms of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis
who are receiving long-term Sativex (nabiximols). Multiple Sclerosis, 18(2), 219–228.
Novotna, A., Mares, J., and Ratcliffe, S. (2011). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallelgroup, enriched-design study of nabiximols (Sativex), as add-on therapy, in subjects with refractory
spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis. European Journal of Neurology, 18, 1122–1131.
Nurmikko, T.J., Serpell, M.G., Hoggart, B., Toomey, P.J., Morlion, B.J., and Haines, D. (2007). Sativex
successfully treats neuropathic pain characterised by allodynia: a randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled clinical trial. Pain, 133, 210–220.
Pertwee, R. (1999). Prescribing cannabinoids for multiple sclerosis: current issues. CNS Drugs, 11(5), 327–
334.
Pertwee, R.G. (2000). Neuropharmacology and therapeutic potential of cannabinoids. Addiction Biology, 5,
37–46.

371

372

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Rog, D.J., Nurmikko, T.J., Friede, T., and Young, C.A. (2005). Randomized, controlled trial of cannabisbased medicine in central pain in multiple sclerosis. Neurology 65, 812–819.
Rog, D.J., Nurmikko, T.J., and Young, C.A. (2007). Oromucosal delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol/cannabidiol
for neuropathic pain associated with multiple sclerosis: an uncontrolled, open-label, 2-year extension
trial. Clinical Therapeutics, 29(9), 2068–2079.
Samara, E., Bialer, M., and Mechoulam, R. (1988). Pharmacokinetics of cannabidiol in dogs. Drug
Metabolism and Disposition, 16(3), 469–472.
Schoedel, K.A., Chen, N., Hilliard, A., et al. (2011). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover study to evaluate the subjective abuse potential and cognitive effects of nabiximols oromucosal spray in subjects with a history of recreational cannabis use. Human Psychopharmacology: Clinical
and Experimental, 26, 224–236.
Serpell, M.G., Notcutt, W., and Collin, C. (2013). Sativex long-term use: an open-label trial in patients
with spasticity due to multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neurology, 260, 285–295.
Siemens, A.J., Walczak, D., and Buckley, F.E. (1980). Characterization of blood disappearance and tissue
distribution of tritiated cannabidiol. Biochemical Pharmacology, 29(3), 462–464.
Wade, D.T., Makela, P.M., House, H., Bateman, C., and Robson, P. (2006). Long-term use of a cannabisbased medicine in the treatment of spasticity and other symptoms in multiple sclerosis. Multiple
Sclerosis, 12, 639–645.
Wade, D.T., Makela, P., Robson, P., House, H., and Bateman, C. (2004). Do cannabis-based medicinal
extracts have general or specific effects on symptoms in multiple sclerosis? A double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled study on 160 patients. Multiple Sclerosis, 10, 434–441.
Wade, D.T., Robson, P., House, H., Makela, P., and Aram, J. (2003). A preliminary controlled study
to determine whether whole-plant cannabis extracts can improve intractable neurogenic symptoms.
Clinical Rehabilitation, 17, 21–29.
Williamson, E.M. and Evans, F.J. (2000). Cannabinoids in clinical practice. Drugs, 60(6), 1303–1314.

Chapter 20

Licensed Cannabis-Based Medicines:
Benefits and Risks
Stephen Wright and Geoffrey Guy

20.1 Introduction
This chapter will review the clinical trials evidence for those cannabinoids which have achieved
regulatory approval in some part of the world during the post-World War II era. This review will
include those cannabinoids which are wholly synthetic, but based on naturally occurring compounds (which some might argue are not “cannabis based”). This has been a time during which
the regulatory framework within which medicines have been approved has changed substantially, and it is apparent that the regulatory standards that applied when the first cannabis-based
medicine was approved in the US in 1985 have changed very considerably. This chapter will
make reference to the changing regulatory environment and then place the licensed cannabinoid
medicines within that framework, although the reader is also referred to Thompson and Langfield
(Chapter 19, this volume) where this regulatory context is described in detail. As the title suggests,
we will describe and discuss the benefit/risk profile of each of the licensed medicines, concentrating firstly on those indications for which the cannabinoids are licensed, and then casting an eye
over other, nonlicensed indications where there exists some evidence of a benefit of and/or a risk
to their use.

20.2 Which cannabis-based medicines are licensed?
There are only three medicines which can be described as “cannabis based” and which are currently licensed for human use. Two of them, nabilone and dronabinol, are wholly synthetic—
while the third, Sativex®, is a plant extract. The chronology of their approval carries with it an
interesting slant on the relationship between social movements and the status of new medicines,
and has to be seen in the context of sociopolitical attitudes to the use of cannabis as a medicine,
which have been discussed eloquently earlier in this book (see section 20.1, and Thompson and
Langfield, Chapter 19, this volume). This chapter aims to summarize the evidence of efficacy and
safety for each of these approved medicines, and to discuss the key differences in risk/benefit
between them. We will also try and look at the clinical development and regulatory processes
which apply to the approval of a synthetic cannabinoid, although recognize that this has been
done to a more detailed extent by Thompson and Langfield (Chapter 19, this volume).

20.3 Dronabinol (Marinol®)
The nomenclature of medicinal cannabinoids can be confusing, especially with regard to the
relationship between the licensed medicine, the active pharmaceutical ingredient, and the status of each of them under the US Controlled Substances Act (CSA) of 1970. These scheduling

374

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

complexities have been discussed earlier in the book, and here we will only repeat that dronabinol
is not approved as a medicine except in the form of Marinol® (or a generic alternative). It is the
finished product which is recognized to have medicinal value, and not the active pharmaceutical
ingredient; the consequence of this distinction, which may seem to be a very fine distinction to
some readers, is that dronabinol remains in Schedule 1 (meaning that it has a high abuse potential
and no medicinal use) while Marinol® resides in Schedule 3 within the CSA. Marinol® is fully
synthetic dronabinol, formulated in sesame oil, with colorings and preservatives, and supplied as
soft gelatin capsules.
20.3.1 Regulatory history

Marinol® was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [NDA 18-651/S-021]
on May 31, 1985, for nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy that had failed
to respond adequately to conventional antiemetic treatments. It is of interest to note that the New
Drug Application (NDA) had first been filed in 1981, so that the approval process was not without its problems. The subsequent re-scheduling process took almost exactly a year, so Marinol®
was first marketed in 1986. On December 22, 1992, Marinol ® was approved for the relief of
anorexia associated with weight loss in patients with HIV-AIDS (human immunodeficiency
virus-acquired immunodeficiency syndrome). Since then, despite a number of published clinical
studies, there have been no further indications approved. At the time of approval, it was well recognized and acknowledged by the FDA that dronabinol (delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC))
was considered the psychoactive component of marijuana. The reader may consider it ironic that
the first cannabis-based medicine to be licensed in the modern era contained the only psychoactive component of marijuana, yet was immediately scheduled to be in a less restrictive schedule of
the CSA than the parent plant. Since its first approval in the US, Marinol® has also been licensed
for use in some other countries, such as Canada and Germany. Generic forms of dronabinol have
now (first approved in 2011) been approved in the US.
20.3.2 Clinical trials
20.3.2.1 Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
20.3.2.1.1 Background Because THC had been placed into Schedule 1 following the CSA of 1970,

clinical trials were severely restricted, despite significant interest. Not only were there few effective
antiemetic agents available at the time, those that were available carried a significant safety burden. Metoclopramide, for example, widely used, carried the risk of tardive dyskinesia. At the same
time, there was a well-publicized belief that smoking cannabis provided relief from the nausea and
vomiting induced by chemotherapy. Anticancer cytotoxic agents may cause nausea and vomiting,
and may be usefully classified into highly emetogenic or moderately emetogenic agents (Hesketh
et al. 1997). The former include cisplatin, dacarbazine, and cyclophosphamide at doses in excess
of 1500 mg/m2 and carmustine at doses in excess of 250 mg/m2 of body surface area. Of these
agents, cisplatin is probably the most highly emetogenic agent, and although its structure had
been described by Peyrone in 1844, it was first approved by the US FDA for the treatment of testicular cancer in 1978. The wider use of this highly emetogenic agent may have led to a wider recognition of the need for effective antiemetic agents, and hastened the development of Marinol®.
Moderately emetogenic cytotoxics include doxorubicin, methotrexate, docetaxel, paclitaxel, and
etoposide. Studies using dronabinol were initiated by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), and
in a number of cases, compared dronabinol with smoked cannabis or placebo. There were a
number of state-sponsored clinical studies in the late 1970s, all of which used smoked cannabis,

Licensed Cannabis-Based Medicines: Benefits and Risks

and some of which used dronabinol, and which may have formed the experience base in which
a number of US states subsequently deregulated herbal cannabis for medicinal use. In itself, this
is an interesting observation, since it illustrates quite how long individual US states have been
interested in the use of cannabis for therapeutic purposes. These six separate state-sponsored
study results remained unpublished, except as technical reports, until 2001 when Musty and
Rossi (2001) published a review of 748 patients exposed to smoked marijuana in these studies,
in some of which oral THC was used as a comparator. Detailed results of these studies is beyond
the scope of this chapter, but the studies all showed smoked marijuana to be variably effective,
although all were open-label studies, using marijuana that did not seem to have been well standardized. In general, oral THC showed similar or lower efficacy than smoked marijuana. Assessing
the extent to which there was a wave of political support behind the wish to develop a form of
cannabis that was licensed for prescription use by the FDA is more or less impossible—however,
the National Cancer Institutes (NCI) licensed the Marinol® patent to Unimed in 1981, who then
filed an NDA more or less immediately in the indication, (and successfully defended a loss of
patent action immediately following rescheduling). FDA approval then took 4 years, suggesting
that there remained some significant issues during the review of the application, either related to
quality concerns, abuse liability concerns, or perhaps that the efficacy and safety data in support
of approval were not overwhelming. Studies of smoked marijuana more or less ceased after the
approval of Marinol®.
In assessing the results of clinical trials, it is relevant to know with which cytotoxic the patients
had been treated—highly emetogenic cytotoxics may produce chemotherapy-induced nausea
and vomiting (CINV) which is more resistant to therapy. Furthermore, CINV can be acute—­
occurring within 24 h of chemotherapy, or delayed, when it may occur up to 5 days following
chemotherapy. Clinical trials of Marinol® have looked very much at acute CINV.
Prior to approval, relatively small numbers of patients had been included in clinical trials, especially when compared with those included in the clinical trials showing the efficacy of the 5-HT3
receptor antagonists such as ondansetron, palosetron, and granisetron, agents which have since
become the “gold standard” of antiemetic therapy. In the latest update to the American Society for
Clinical Oncology antiemetic guidelines, cannabinoids are relegated to agents of lower therapeutic index, and only recommended for use when all other agents (including corticosteroids) have
failed.

®

20.3.2.1.2 Efficacy of Marinol in CINV There seems no doubt that initial studies of THC in the

treatment of CINV were encouraged by the observation that younger patients who smoked marijuana during their chemotherapy reported less nausea and vomiting (Gralla 1984). Early studies
used doses of between 2.5 mg and 10 mg every 3–4 h, although a clear relationship between dose,
dose schedule, and efficacy has never been established. The efficacy of dronabinol (THC) in
CINV was reviewed by Gralla et al. in 1984, and again by Tramer et al. in 2001, and the conclusions of those reviews are similar. The former review identified 11 controlled clinical studies, and
concluded that metoclopramide, corticosteroids, and butyrophenones offered greater efficacy
than dronabinol, but that dronabinol was effective. Chang et al. (1979) found THC to be superior
to placebo, as did Frytak et al. (1979) and Orr et al. (1980). Sallan et al. (1980) and Frytak et al.
(1979) found THC to be superior to prochlorperazine. Gralla et al. (1984) found intravenous
metoclopramide to be more effective than oral THC in a double-blind double-dummy study.
The variability of trial designs, of the methods of reporting efficacy and of the emetogenic agent
used makes clear statements of the quantitative efficacy of dronabinol difficult, although Gralla
et al. (1984) concluded that THC was more effective when used with moderately emetogenic

375

376

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

cytotoxics. Tramer et al. (2001) identified those comparative studies where control event rates
(vomiting) were defined as “medium” (25–75%) and noted that cannabinoids were superior to
comparators (most commonly prochlorperazine or metoclopramide). However, in patients with
more extreme or less severe (>75% or < 25%, respectively) CINV, superiority has not been demonstrated. This would seem to support the earlier conclusions of Gralla et al. One small study (n
= 64) showed dronabinol to be equally as effective as ondansetron in delayed CINV (Meiri et al.
2007), although each agent was effective in a higher proportion of subjects than the combination.
Regrettably there do not appear to be any well-controlled studies comparing dronabinol with the
5-HT3 receptor antagonists which have become the standard first-line therapy in acute CINV,
and dronabinol was only ever approved for medicinal use in this indication in the US, Canada,
and South Africa.

®

20.3.2.1.3 Safety of Marinol in CINV The dominant side effects of dronabinol in the clinical tri-

als investigating its place in the treatment of acute CINV are those which relate to its activity at
the type 1 cannabinoid receptor (CB1). There was a high rate of a “high” sensation, of drowsiness,
somnolence, and sedation. Within the psychiatric or neurologic body systems, dizziness occurred
in up to 50% of patients, and hallucination and paranoia in 6% and 5% respectively. Despite this,
in those crossover studies where patients were asked to express a preference, the difference in
favor of dronabinol over placebo was significant, and in active controlled studies, patient preference was generally in favor of dronabinol. Furthermore, relatively few (10%) patients withdrew
from studies due to adverse events. This suggested to the authors (Tramer et al. 2001) either that
these adverse effects were deemed to be minor compared with the benefit, or perhaps, that the
“high” might be a positive experience for the patients. An insight into this might come from the
NCI sponsored study by Ungerleider et al. (1985), who explored the reasons for patient preference in a crossover study of THC versus prochlorperazine in 139 patients undergoing a variety of
chemotherapy regimens. Briefly they found that patient preference was closely related to efficacy—that the patients preferred the agent that gave them greatest symptom relief. THC-related side
effects were also associated with a positive preference, and the authors suggested that somnolence
might be a desirable part of the therapeutic profile in this indication. In an earlier controlled study
in more than 200 patients, Ungerleider et al. (1982) separated spontaneously reported adverse
effects into several categories: 45% of patients reported somnolence, 36% reported “physiological effects” (dizziness, headache, tachycardia, chills), while 34% reported “psychological effects”
(mental clouding, short-term memory loss, and dissociative reactions).
20.3.2.2 AIDS-associated anorexia and weight loss

®

20.3.2.2.1 Background In 1992, Marinol was approved by the FDA for the orphan indication of

anorexia in AIDS patients. This approval seems to have been based largely on two studies by Beal
et al. (1995, 1997). As a consequence of this approval, the market for Marinol ® increased very
substantially, with AIDS patients accounting for around 80% of sales. This approval was a time
of very active lobbying by medicinal marijuana proponents who, in 1991, publicized the FDA’s
earlier decision to grant an IND to marijuana for a Compassionate Access Program as a no-cost
supply of marijuana cigarettes for AIDS patients. This IND enabled individuals to receive a legal
supply of marijuana cigarettes contingent upon a recommendation from their physicians, and
was followed rapidly by the FDA approval of Marinol®. How much these events were coincidence,
and how much driven by federal (or even Presidential) will is entirely unclear, but the reader will
see that the normal requirements for a demonstration of efficacy and safety appear to have been
generously interpreted by the FDA for this approval.

Licensed Cannabis-Based Medicines: Benefits and Risks

®

20.3.2.2.2 Efficacy The clinical studies that led to the approval of Marinol in this indication com-

prised a single 6-week placebo-controlled randomized study in 139 patients, followed by an openlabel extension study. In the placebo-controlled study, only 99/139 patients had data at 4 weeks
and 91 at 6 weeks. The dose of dronabinol used was 2.5 mg twice daily, substantially lower than
that used in CINV. There was a significant difference in a hunger Visual Analog Scale (VASH)
between Marinol® and placebo, without any significant difference in weight. On Marinol® there
was a 16-point increase in hunger compared with an 8-point improvement on placebo. Leaving
aside the question of whether hunger is synonymous with appetite, this seems to have been the
extent of the placebo-controlled data that persuaded the FDA of the efficacy of Marinol® in this
indication. In long-term use (Beal 1997) the improvements in appetite were sustained, although
drop-out rates were high, with 36/94 patients having withdrawn by 3 months. The mean duration
of treatment was 5.8 months (standard deviation = 4.4 months). In retrospect, it seems out of the
ordinary that the FDA would approve a new indication based on such limited efficacy data, and
there must inevitably be speculation that other factors may have played a role.

®

20.3.2.2.3 Safety The dose of Marinol used to stimulate appetite in AIDS patients is lower than

the doses used in the antiemetic indication, and most likely because of this, the frequency of typical adverse events is less. In the former indication, a dose of 2.5 mg twice daily was used in the
clinical studies, whereas in the latter indication, the dose was variable, but ranged from 2.5 mg
up to 40 mg per day, usually taken every 3–4 h for 24 h. As a consequence of this, the Product
Monograph (Canada) identifies the following adverse effects as being more common in the
antiemetic indication: amnesia, ataxia, and hallucination. The US package insert identifies the
phenomenon of getting “high” to occur in 24% of patients in the emesis indication, compared
to 8% of patients with HIV-AIDS, taking the smaller dose (http://www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/
dockets/05n0479/05N-0479-emc0004-04.pdf). Importantly, there do not appear to have been
any unexpected long-term consequences of the continued use of Marinol®, to the extent that the
WHO reported in its 2007 assessment (WHO 2007 p. 19) that:
The US responded that, although its susceptibility (sic) for abuse can vary with the dosage form, the
pharmaceutical product containing Marinol is associated with low levels of diversion and abuse. The
US is not aware of any drug related deaths, drug dependence or addiction associated with Marinol.

20.4 Nabilone
20.4.1 Background

Nabilone (dl-3-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)-6,6ab 7,8,10,10a alpha-hexahydro-1-hydroxy-6,6-dimethyl9H dibenzo [b,d] pyran-9-one) is a synthetic analogue of THC, which was developed in the 1970s
(Lemberger and Rowe 1975) well before the target receptor was identified. It has low nanomolar
affinity for the CB1 receptor, and somewhat less at the CB2 receptor.
20.4.2 Regulatory history

The regulatory history of nabilone (Cesamet® ) mirrors to some extent that of dronabinol.
Although the initial FDA approval for CINV was granted in 1985 (the same year as Marinol®) for
the indication of CINV that has not responded to conventional antiemetics (the same indication as
Marinol®), the drug was not marketed in the US until 2006. By this time, newer antiemetic agents
had been developed, notably the 5-HT3 receptor antagonists and the Substance P (NeuroKinin 1)
antagonists.

377

378

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

20.4.3 Efficacy of nabilone in CINV

The antiemetic efficacy of nabilone has been extensively reviewed by Tramer et al. (2001) and
Ware et al. (2008). Herman et al. (1977, 1979) published two controlled studies comparing
nabilone with prochlorperazine. The authors quoted an 80% success rate on nabilone, compared
with a 32% response rate on prochlorperazine, and the effectiveness of nabilone was maintained
over the 5-day treatment period. Subsequently, Einhorn et al. (1981) and others (Ahmedazai
et al. 1983; Niiranen and Mattson 1985) found similar results in patients treated predominantly
with the highly emetic cisplatin. The relevance of this finding to current treatment options is
limited, since prochlorperazine is not regarded as a first-line antiemetic agent. So much have
new treatment options come to dominate the therapeutic landscape that the place of nabilone or
of prochlorperazine as a treatment option in CINV is not even discussed in the latest guidelines
published by the American Society of Clinical Oncology (Basch et al. 2012).
20.4.4 Safety of nabilone in CINV

The activity that nabilone displays at the CB1 receptor more or less predicts the safety profile.
Overall, adverse events are seen in around twice as many patients as are seen in patients taking
prochlorperazine in controlled studies, and were more often severe; despite this, patient preference remained in favor of nabilone, as was the case with dronabinol. Other reports make it
apparent that the nature of the question may determine the answer, at least in part. For example,
Ahmedzai et al. (1983) reported that patient preference was in favor of nabilone over prochlorperazine, but that far fewer patients wished to take it again than stated their preference for it over
prochlorperazine. In short, while patients recognized the effectiveness of nabilone, this did not
necessarily mean that they would like to take it again. Although the frequency of the most common adverse events varied between studies, the numbers reported in their controlled study by
Ahmedzai et al. (1983) seem typical. They describe the adverse event of drowsiness in more than
50% of patients, and dizziness and light-headedness in 35% and 18% respectively. Euphoria was
reported in 14%, and 7% reported getting “high.” Jones et al. (1982) reported dizziness in 65%
and drowsiness in 51% of patients. It was unusual for these events to provoke withdrawal from
treatment.

20.5 Nabiximols (Sativex®)
20.5.1 Background

Despite the availability of synthetic THC in the form of dronabinol, it remained the case that
large numbers of people with chronic symptomatic conditions, particularly those associated
with chronic pain and/or spasticity associated with multiple sclerosis (MS), turned to the use of
herbal cannabis for symptom relief. On both sides of the Atlantic, this phenomenon provoked
government-­sponsored reviews of what was seen as a problem for society as a whole, for the
criminal justice system, and for the medical system as well. It is a reasonable conclusion that
the synthetic cannabinoids were not apparently providing a legitimate medical alternative to the
illegitimate herb. In the late 1990s, the House of Lords Science and Technology Select Committee
in the UK, together with the British Medical Association, urged the development of a medicinal
form of cannabis. The Ninth Report of the Select Committee concluded (1998, Para 8.22) “We
therefore recommend that clinical trials of cannabis for the treatment of MS and chronic pain
should be mounted as a matter of urgency.” In the US, the Office of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP) asked the Institute of Medicine to review the subject; among their recommendations

Licensed Cannabis-Based Medicines: Benefits and Risks

was that clinical studies of cannabinoids should be done to establish medicinal value, and that
smoking was not likely to be an acceptable method of delivery.
Sativex® is distinct from the other licensed cannabinoids insofar as it comprises an extract of
the cannabis plant, formulated as a sublingual/oromucosal spray. Each 100 microliters of the spray
delivers 2.7 mg of THC and 2.5 mg of cannabidiol (CBD).
20.5.2 Regulatory history

Sativex® received its first approvals in Canada in 2005 under legislation that permits conditional
approval of a new medicine in areas of high unmet medical need, and in the presence of highly
promising clinical data; approval in EU was delayed until late 2010 and early 2011, when Sativex ®
was approved in the UK and Spain following a decentralized procedure. As such, it became the first
full plant extract to be approved as a prescription medicine in the modern era. The rocky regulatory
path is described in more detail by Thompson and Langfield (Chapter 19, this volume). Since then,
Sativex® has been approved across most of Europe, in Australia and New Zealand, in Canada, and
in Israel. By the time this book reaches print, it seems likely that Sativex ® will also have received
approval in several other territories. While it is licensed as second-line therapy for the relief of spasticity in MS in all those countries where it is approved, in some countries it also can be prescribed for
the treatment of neuropathic pain in people with MS, and for the treatment of cancer-related pain,
where it is used as an adjunct to opioids. The pharmacology supporting each of these indications has
been described in other chapters in this volume, but it is important to note that while the mechanism
of action of dronabinol and nabilone is undoubtedly primarily based on their effect at the cannabinoid receptors, this is unlikely to be the case with Sativex®, where there may be an array of pharmacological actions which contribute to its efficacy. In particular, the recently described effects of CBD
on the vanilloid receptor system (Bisogno et al. 2001), on the uptake of nucleosides (Carrier et al.
2006) and on the chemotaxis of immune active cells (Sacerdote et al. 2005) all provide a coherent
reason why this cannabinoid is likely to contribute to the therapeutic effects of Sativex®. This observation alone should be enough to indicate that it is not appropriate to lump all cannabinoids together
with regard to their risk/benefit, any more than it would be appropriate to lump together all betablockers or 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors, or any class
of medicine for that matter. Nonetheless, as we shall see, there is a considerable tendency to do so.
20.5.3 Spasticity in multiple sclerosis

MS is one of the most common neurological diseases of young adults. It is characterized by the
development of inflammatory plaques in the central nervous system (CNS), including the brain, spinal cord, and optic nerves. The primary process is inflammatory damage to the myelin of the CNS,
which may be reversible, but axonal damage may also occur and this leads to increasing permanent
disability. MS also has a degenerative component, and is associated with progressive brain atrophy.
Spasticity is a common symptom in MS, but it may occur in any condition that damages the
upper motor pathways of the CNS (Fig. 20.1), and it is also commonly seen in stroke and spinal
cord injuries. The hallmark of spasticity is an increase in muscle tone and disinhibition of muscle
stretch reflexes, but the upper motor neuron syndrome, of which spasticity is a part, is more complex in its manifestations. Because of this, the choice of clinically relevant endpoints in clinical
trials is critical, and in the view of the Cochrane review (Shakespeare et al. 2003) “must reflect the
patient daily experience of their spasticity.” It is not adequate to use only one component of the
phenomenon of spasticity in order to determine therapeutic responses, and efforts to do so have
usually resulted in failure.

379

380

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Negative

Positive

Acute hypotonia
Weakness & fatiguability
Loss of dexterity
Loss of cutaneous reflexes

During movement
(spastic dystonias)

At rest

Proprioceptive reflexes
Increased tendon jerks
Clonus
Spasticity

Cutaneous & nociceptive
reflexes

Flexor withdrawal reflexes
Flexor & adductor spasms
Clasp-knife reaction
Positive Babinski

Co-contraction
Associated reactions
Flexor withdrawal reflexes
Positive support reaction

Extensor thrust
Pushing reactions

Extensor reflexes
Extensor spasms
Positive support reaction

Fig. 20.1 Clinical features of the upper motor neuron syndrome.

Characteristically, spasticity leads to exaggerated flexor tone and extensor weakness in the upper
limbs, and exaggerated extensor tone and flexor weakness in the lower limbs, so that patients with
spasticity tend to have flexed upper limbs and stiff, extended lower limbs. This leads to gait difficulties with poor knee bending and poor toe clearance, and may greatly increase the effort of
walking beyond the problems caused by weakness alone, because flexor muscle groups may have
to overcome the unwanted activity in antagonistic extensor muscle groups. Some spasticity may
be useful, however, because it may keep the legs stiff enough to support body weight when voluntary power alone may be inadequate. Hence assessing the clinical relevance of an intervention in
spasticity, whether it be pharmacological or physical (i.e., physical therapy), must make an effort
to incorporate the effect of the intervention on the way the patient feels or functions.
20.5.4 Clinical trials with Sativex®
20.5.4.1 Efficacy in the treatment of spasticity in MS

The clinical development of Sativex® followed a more “conventional” course than that of Marinol®,
insofar as it comprised a series of Phase 1 studies, aimed at determining the pharmacokinetics
of the cannabinoids (and metabolites) within the botanical medicine, followed by Phase 2 studies aimed at better defining the efficacy, and a series of Phase 3 studies aimed at investigating
the benefit/risk in people with MS and spasticity. These studies have been reviewed elsewhere
(Oreja-Guevara 2012), but essentially comprise five placebo-controlled, randomized studies, in
all of which Sativex® was added to existing oral antispasticity agents, in patients who were experiencing at least moderately severe spasticity, despite the use of optimal conventional therapy,
such as baclofen, tizanidine, gabapentin, and benzodiazepines. The baseline characteristics of
the patients included in the studies were similar: the history of MS was greater than 10 years in
all studies, the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) at baseline was between 5.5 and 6, and
all patients had tried and failed at least one line of oral antispasticity therapy. In chronological
order, the first study was that of Wade et al. (2004), in which patients identified their most troublesome symptom out of five possible symptoms—spasticity, pain, bladder disturbance, tremor,
or spasms, using a 0–100 Visual Analogue Scale. Those who identified spasticity as their primary
symptom showed a highly significant improvement on Sativex® compared with placebo, which
was not seen with the other symptoms. This study, along with previously published Phase 2

Licensed Cannabis-Based Medicines: Benefits and Risks

studies (Wade et al. 2003), suggested that spasticity was the optimal target for the product. Collin
et al. (2007) studied 189 patients with spasticity due to MS, using a 0–10 Numeric Rating Scale
(NRS) as the primary outcome measure, and found a statistically significant difference between
Sativex® and placebo in improving the patient-rated outcome of spasticity severity, over a 6-week
treatment period. Of the secondary efficacy measures, only the motricity index approached significance in favor of Sativex®. This may be important, because that index can be regarded as a
measure of voluntary muscle power, and reduction in muscle power, with the consequence of an
increased risk of falls, is a recognized problem with existing antispasticity agents. The fact that
Sativex® showed a quantitative improvement in the motricity index compared with placebo, suggests that it may be unlikely to cause muscle weakness, and may not therefore be associated with
an increased risk of falls.
The same lead investigator (Collin et al. 2010) published a larger study (n = 337), with a 12-week
post-randomization treatment period, in which the intent-to-treat analysis showed no significant
difference between Sativex® and placebo, although the per-protocol analysis did so. The three
studies were then reported as a meta-analysis (Wade et al. 2010), which used a responder analysis
as the key efficacy assessment. This showed that 35% of patients on Sativex® achieved an improvement of at least 30% from baseline—which is equivalent to feeling “much improved” (Farrar 2008)
compared with 24% of patients on placebo. While this difference between drug and placebo may
seem relatively small, it is very much in line with many medicines used in neuropsychiatry. The
meta-analysis also showed significant differences in spasm scores and in global impression of
change.
These studies illustrated one of the recurring difficulties in analyzing studies of medicines
aimed at treating chronic symptomatic conditions, such as pain and spasticity. It is clear from
clinical practice that patients do not all respond to such medicines. To include a proportion of
nonresponders in clinical studies will mask the effect of a medicine in those patients who are
capable of mounting a response, and thus bias the study against the drug under investigation.
From a statistical point of view, there is an implicit assumption in sample size calculations that all
patients are capable of responding, so that when a condition is encountered where this is not the
case, sample size calculations may be wrong. One method of overcoming this bias is to randomize
only those patients who are capable of responding to treatment—a maneuver which is becoming
increasingly common in oncology studies using targeted therapies, and has been used in cardiovascular medicine for many years. McQuay et al. (2008) have recently discussed the merits of
using an enriched study design, and guidance regarding how to design such studies can be found
on the US FDA website (http://www.fda.gov/).
The final two published randomized studies of Sativex® in MS spasticity both used a form
of enriched study design. Novotna et al. (2011) first exposed patients to a 4-week, single blind
treatment period with Sativex®, then randomized only those patients who showed a clinically
meaningful improvement. In this way, the only patients exposed to the Sativex® versus placebo
comparison were those who were capable of improvement, and who would have continued with
the medicine in a setting of “real-world” clinical practice. In this way, this study may be said to
have had more external validity than the conventional clinical study, since it better reflected the
way that the drug would be used in the clinic. This study firstly showed that 47% of patients show
a meaningful response to Sativex®, and that there was a highly significant difference in outcomes
between Sativex® and placebo, when such patients were exposed over a 13-week period. This
study also showed highly significant differences in sleep quality, spasm scores, patient, carer, and
physician global impression of function, and perhaps most notably in the Barthel Activities of
Daily Living Index—confirming functional improvement.

381

382

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Notcutt et al. (2012) reported a modification of the enriched study design by randomizing a
cohort of patients who had been receiving long-term benefit from Sativex® to either continue on
Sativex® or to switch, blind, to placebo. This type of study is termed an enriched enrolment, randomized withdrawal study, and is especially suited to showing whether the efficacy of a medicine
is maintained in long-term use. This study showed that patients were significantly more likely to
fail treatment on placebo than on Sativex®. It reinforced the conclusions of long-term open-label
safety studies which also showed efficacy on Sativex® to be maintained in long-term use.
Following the first regulatory approval of Sativex®, several other studies have been published
which add to the body of information available to prescribers. Notcutt (2012) conducted a questionnaire survey of long-term Sativex® users and found a reduced frequency of visits to the doctor,
a reduced rate of accidents requiring medical attention, and continued improvement in spasticity
and sleep in particular. Carers reported in this questionnaire survey that their own quality of life
had improved, even to the extent that they were able to get back to work. Slof et al. (2012) published a pharmacoeconomic evaluation of Sativex® that confirmed its pharmacoeconomic benefit,
although this has been questioned by others.
20.5.4.2 The use of a patient-reported outcome measure

In general, health outcomes may be either physician based or patient reported. Physician-based
measures generally address the pathological basis of disease, and evaluate health in terms of quantity. They do not provide a picture of disease impact, and in the case of the Ashworth Scale in particular, may also bear little or no relation to the functional abilities of the patient. The Ashworth
Scale is a widely used scale for the clinical assessment of spasticity from all causes (Skold 2000).
It mainly assesses one component of spasticity, movement-provoked spastic muscle resistance
(tonic stretch reflex). This is only one part of the spasticity syndrome, which includes increased
tendon reflexes (phasic stretch reflex), increased exteroceptive reflexes (flexor reflex) and pathologic radiation of reflexes between spinal segments over time (see Fig. 20.1). The syndrome causes
stiffness, a reduced range of movement, painful spasms, contractures, and a consequent range of
functional disabilities.
Evidence validating the Ashworth Scale as a measure of increased tone (especially in the lower
limbs, and especially in MS) is lacking, and many careful studies have confirmed its lack of
validity.
Hobart et al. (2004) have commented:
Patient-based outcomes are the consequences of disease and treatment that are considered important
to patients. Patients are the best source of information about therapeutic benefit defined in terms of
function and well-being. As patients, their caregivers and their physician differ in their interpretation
of the impact of illness, it is important to elicit information from patients about which outcomes are
important. This is supported by irrefutable evidence that patients can provide reliable and valid judgements of health status and the benefits of treatment.

In assessing the clinical relevance of an intervention, whether it be pharmacologic, or physiotherapy, for example, it is important to use a measure that reflects therapeutic benefit. Patient report
has been described as the ultimate measure of health status (Ware 1993).
EU Guidelines (E9) make clear that the primary variable of a clinical study (i.e., primary endpoint) should be the variable capable of providing the most clinically relevant and convincing evidence directly related to the primary objective of the trial to provide scientific evidence regarding
efficacy of the product. The selection of the primary endpoint should reflect the accepted norms
and standards in the field of research to which the product pertains. The use of a reliable and

Licensed Cannabis-Based Medicines: Benefits and Risks

validated variable with which experience has been gained either in earlier studies or in published
literature is recommended. The guidance goes on to say that there should be sufficient evidence
that the primary variable can provide a valid and reliable measure of some clinically relevant and
important treatment benefit in the target patient population.
Robert Temple is the Head of the Office of Medical Policy at the FDA’s Center for Drug
Evaluation and Response. In a detailed discussion of the value of disease markers, he has expressed
very clearly his view of what constitutes a clinically relevant endpoint for clinical studies. It is “a
direct measure of how a patient feels, functions or survives” (Temple 1999).
With specific reference to spasticity in people with MS the Cochrane reviewers (Shakespeare
et al. 2003, p. 11) concluded:
The variability of spasticity and the lack of a sensitive, reliable, functionally- and symptomatically-­
relevant assessment tool for spasticity have contributed to the inconclusive results of placebo-­controlled
trials attempting to document the efficacy of anti-spasticity agents which are in widespread use.

They go on to make their view clear on what constitutes an appropriate primary outcome measure.
Such measures must correspond to the daily patient experience of spasticity.

This view has also been expressed very clearly by Sneed et al. (2006, p. 79), who summarized the
debate as follows:
Ultimately what is overlooked in tone/spasticity measures is that it is not the score but how the person
functions that matters to the person. One is not interested in one’s Ashworth Score first thing in the
morning, but whether one can comb one’s hair or cook one’s breakfast.

For these reasons, and also because of the shortcomings of the Ashworth Scale, and because of the
expert consensus in favor of a patient-reported outcome measure, the Sativex® studies used the
NRS. However, and recognizing the importance of the independence of the physician, the studies
also used a Physician Global Impression of change in the severity of spasticity as an independent and objective assessment of the patient’s function. In the protocol for the study reported by
Novotna et al. (2011), the physician was asked to ensure that his or her assessment was a measure
of the general functional capacity of the patients as it related to the severity of their spasticity. As
well as this, the use of a caregiver’s assessment of the functional capacity of the patient adds to
the reliability of the results. Both of these scales provide independent verification of the patients’
reports of the severity of their spasticity-associated symptoms. The validity of the NRS has also
been confirmed in a longitudinal validation study, in which the correlation between the NRS and
a basket of physician assessments of spasticity was tracked over time in a cohort of MS patients
with stable spasticity, attending a neurorehabilitation clinic (Anwar and Barnes 2009), and in a
transverse study in which the change in NRS with treatment was correlated with the change in a
series of other assessments of the severity of spasticity (Farrar et al. 2008).
20.5.4.3 Maintaining the blind-to-treatment allocation

There is a perceived danger that patients exposed to a medicine with a typical adverse event profile
might become aware of their treatment allocation and become unreliable in their reports of the effects
of the drug. This was investigated in the Sativex® studies using an interesting methodology whereby
the interaction between the occurrence of typical adverse events, or the presence of prior experience
of cannabis, and the efficacy of Sativex®, was explored using a series of statistical models (Wright et al.
2012). These analyses showed no evidence of any impact of the presence of typical adverse events on
efficacy, nor any effect of prior experience of cannabis. This provides reassurance that the results of
the studies were not likely to have been confounded by unblinding to treatment allocation.

383

384

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

20.5.4.4 Safety of Sativex®

The safety profile of Sativex® appears to compare favorably with that of dronabinol and nabilone,
and has been recently reviewed (Wade 2012). The most common unwanted effects are dizziness
fatigue, and somnolence, although these do not commonly lead to treatment cessation. Euphoria
is present at a much lower rate than that published for dronabinol and nabilone, suggesting that
there is something in the composition or mode of administration of Sativex® which reduces this
effect. In the published clinical studies with Sativex®, the mean daily dose was persistently around
eight sprays, containing 21.6 mg of THC and 20 mg of CBD. At similar daily doses of dronabinol,
rates of dizziness are much higher than those seen with Sativex®, and adverse events within the
psychiatric body system were also notably higher. For example, in the body of data submitted in
support of the approval of Marinol® in CINV, the rate of euphoria was reported as between 3%
and 10%. In Sativex® studies in patients with cancer pain, a similar population of patients, the rate
of euphoria was 0.3%. Hallucinations, paranoia, and abnormal thinking all occurred at a greater
incidence in the Marinol® studies, even though the dose of THC was similar. It may be that the
presence of CBD is responsible for this lower frequency of psychiatric adverse events, since CBD
has been shown to reduce the psychoactivity of THC (see McPartland and Russo, Chapter 15, this
volume). Equally, the delivery of Sativex® by the oromucosal route has the potential to reduce
the extent of first-pass metabolism, and there is some evidence that the proportion of the first
metabolite of THC—11-OH-THC—is reduced in patients using Sativex® compared with those
using Marinol® (Karschner et al. 2011). This metabolite is active at the CB1 receptor, and there is
evidence that it may give rise to a dysphoric, rather than euphoric, effect.
20.5.4.5 Effects on cognition

The adverse event data suggest that Sativex® may have an adverse effect on short-term memory,
at least as perceived by the subject, but formal placebo-controlled studies show no effect in tests
of cognition. A Phase 1 study showed that the cannabidiol present in Sativex® is able to reduce the
cognitive impairment associated with THC (Nicholson et al. 2004). A recent placebo-controlled
crossover study examined the effect of Sativex® versus placebo on the Paced Auditory Serial
Addition Task (PASAT) in a series of 18 subjects with spasticity due to MS. PASAT is a serial
addition task used to assess the rate of information processing, sustained attention, and working
memory. This study showed no significant differences in cognitive function between Sativex® and
placebo (Aragona et al. 2008).
A human abuse liability study assessed the effect of substantial single doses of Sativex® on
various aspects of cognitive performance. At doses of four, eight, and 16 sprays taken all at
once, Sativex® was not significantly different from placebo with regard to its effect on cognition
(Schoedel et al. 2011). Nonetheless, there is significant concern expressed in the literature about
the long-term effects of cannabinoids on cognition, and it will be interesting to see whether the
increasingly widespread use of Sativex® results in any new findings in this area. While Marinol®
has been used in the US since 1986, there have been no significant findings of long-term cognitive
impairment, and while the short-term adverse effects of the licensed cannabinoids are particularly targeted towards the CNS, there seems little evidence of long-term effects.
20.5.5 Abuse liability

Cannabis as herbal material, or derivatives thereof, are classed as having a high level of abuse
liability, and are therefore included in Schedule 1 in the US. Cannabis is easily the most widely
used illicit drug in the world with estimates of up to 200 million current consumers. Prevalence

Licensed Cannabis-Based Medicines: Benefits and Risks

rates in the UK and US are around 10% of the adult population as a whole, two-thirds of which
are accounted for by individuals between the ages of 16 and 29 years. Cannabis is approximately
equivalent to alcohol in its ability to produce psychological dependence, but only half as likely to
produce physical dependence (Nutt et al. 2007). Between 4% and 9% of those who try cannabis
eventually become dependent upon it, and in the UK it now represents the primary drug problem
for around 7% of admissions to drug dependency programs. The euphoric effects of cannabis
and its dependence potential are the result of the interaction of the cannabinoid, THC, with CB1
receptors in the CNS, where it acts as a partial agonist (Devane et al. 1988; Mechoulam 1970).
These effects are enhanced when THC reaches high levels quickly (Busto et al. 1986).
Therefore the manufacturer and developer of any medicine based on cannabis, and in particular
any medicine containing components of the cannabis plant, has the responsibility of determining
the abuse liability of their medicine. This has become an increasing preoccupation of regulatory
agencies and governments, as the abuse of prescription medicines, and in particular prescription
opioids, has become more and more widespread. The determination of abuse liability may depend
on postapproval investigation, as was the case with Marinol®. Its abuse potential has been reviewed
by Calhoun and colleagues (1998). They found no evidence of significant abuse or diversion,
“scrip-chasing,” or a street market for the drug. Marijuana users do not value its effects since the
onset of action is slow and gradual, it is at most only weakly reinforcing, and most people find its
effects are dysphoric and unappealing. The authors concluded that the evidence suggest that dronabinol has a very low abuse potential. An evaluation of the abuse potential of nabilone reached similar conclusions, with cases of abuse or diversion “rare or isolated” (Ware 2008). The World Health
Organization, in their 2006 report, noted that “the pharmaceutical product containing Marinol is
associated with low levels of diversion and abuse. The US is not aware of any drug related deaths,
drug dependence or addiction associated with Marinol” (World Health Organization 2006).
The abuse liability of Sativex® has been compared with that of Marinol® in a formal human abuse
liability study (Schoedel et al. 2011). This study was conducted as a randomized, double-blind,
6-period crossover study with six treatment sessions. Sativex® was administered at four, eight, and
16 sprays (containing 10.8, 21.6, and 43.2 mg THC and 10, 20, and 40 mg CBD) and compared with
two doses of Marinol® (20 mg and 40 mg THC), and placebo in active recreational marijuana users.
The three primary study endpoints were: Drug Liking Visual Analogue Scale (DL VAS),
Subjective Drug Value (SDV), and Addiction Research Center Inventory Morphine Benzedrine
Subscale (ARCI MBG; a measure of euphoria).
Secondary endpoints included (Choice Reaction Time (CRT), Divided Attention (DA) and
Sternberg Short-Term Memory (STM) tests). Serial pharmacodynamic evaluations (taken at each
treatment session) in this study consisted of various Addiction Research Center Inventory (ARCI)
subscales (marijuana, LSD, etc.), Overall Drug Liking and other subjective effects VASs (“High”,
“Stoned” “Drowsiness”, “Good / Bad effects,” etc.).
On a dose-for-dose basis, virtually all primary variables produced higher scores on Marinol®
than for Sativex® containing the corresponding THC dose. Of specific interest is that two of the
three Drug Liking parameters were significantly higher for dronabinol 20 mg than for Sativex®,
with the third parameter approaching significance. There were no significant differences between
the products in any of the parameters at the high (40 mg) dose. In addition, with regard to secondary variables, there appear to be significant differences between eight sprays of Sativex® and
an approximate dose equivalent of Marinol ® containing 20 mg THC. Dronabinol produced
significantly higher values on a number of key secondary variables, whereas for the 16 sprays of
Sativex® and an approximate dose equivalent of Marinol® containing 40 mg THC, no such difference appeared to exist.

385

386

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

The study concluded that, at a dose of four sprays (10.8 mg THC), Sativex® in subjects with
a history of recreational marijuana use had no significant abuse potential compared to placebo
(primary endpoints). As for any THC-containing medication taken at larger doses, Sativex® at
doses of 21.6 mg THC and 43.2 mg THC in subjects with a history of recreational marijuana use
had statistically significant abuse potential compared to placebo. Marinol® at doses of 20 mg and
40 mg in such subjects also has statistically significant abuse potential compared to placebo.
The authors concluded:
The study was valid for detecting abuse-related effects of cannabinoid compounds, and the results
demonstrated that Marinol has significant abuse potential. Sativex (21.6 mg and 43.2 mg) also had
significant abuse potential compared with placebo, but on a dose-per-dose basis, less abuse potential compared with Marinol . Although this was statistically significant primarily for the 21.6 mg
versus 20 mg doses, the overall pattern of results suggest that Sativex is subjectively different from
Marinol . Therefore, it can be concluded that the risk for abuse associated with Sativex should be
no higher and possibly lower than Marinol , a Schedule III drug that does not appear to be significantly abused.

®

®

®

®

®

®

®

One of the key features of abuse liability is the presence of physical dependence and withdrawal
symptoms. Budney and colleagues (2004) have reviewed the validity and significance of the cannabis withdrawal syndrome, and concluded: “Converging evidence from basic laboratory and
clinical studies indicates that a withdrawal syndrome reliably follows discontinuation of chronic
heavy use of cannabis or tetrahydrocannabinol. Common symptoms are primarily emotional and
behavioural, although appetite change, weight loss, and physical discomfort are also frequently
reported.” They went on to propose that the syndrome be defined by the presence of at least
four of the following symptoms accompanied by “evidence that these symptoms produced clinically significant distress or dysfunction”: anger or aggression; decreased appetite or weight loss;
irritability; nervousness/anxiety; restlessness; sleep difficulties, including strange dreams; chills;
depressed mood; stomach pain; shakiness; sweating.
The possibility that abrupt cessation of Sativex® treatment might produce a withdrawal syndrome has been explored systematically. Notcutt et al. (2012) studied 36 MS patients receiving
long-term Sativex® (median exposure 3.6 years) who were randomly allocated either to continue
Sativex® or switch to identical placebo for 4 weeks. No withdrawal syndrome was reported in the
latter group. Langford et al. (2013) studied 42 MS patients who had received at least 12 weeks
of treatment with Sativex® and were randomized to continue the drug or switch to placebo
over a 4-week treatment period. Again, no withdrawal syndrome was apparent in the placebo
recipients.
20.5.6 Other approved indications

Neither dronabinol nor nabilone have been licensed for use in other indications, although there
have been a series of clinical studies published in other conditions, notably neuropathic pain.
Results of these studies have been variable, and are shown in Table 20.1. On the other hand,
Sativex® has been approved in certain geographies for the relief of central neuropathic pain in
patients with MS (Canada, Israel) and in Canada for the relief of persistent (as opposed to breakthrough) cancer-related pain, in patients with advanced cancer. In each of these settings, Sativex®
has been used as an adjunct, illustrating the fact that cannabinoids appear to enhance the efficacy
of other agents, particularly where those other agents have not been able to confer adequate relief.
The specific positive interaction between cannabinoids and opioids has been described in more
detail elsewhere in this book (see Costa and Comelli, Chapter 25, this volume).

Licensed Cannabis-Based Medicines: Benefits and Risks

Table 20.1 Randomized controlled clinical trials of approved cannabis-based medicines in pain states
Cannabinoid

Indication

Study design

Reference

Dronabinol

Cancer pain

RCT (crossover)

Noyes et al. 1975a, 1975b

Intravenous THC

Dental pain

RCT (crossover)

Raft et al. 1977

Dronabinol

Postoperative pain

RCT

Buggy et al. 2003

Dronabinol

Experimental pain

RCT (crossover)

Naef et al. 2003

Dronabinol

Spinal cord injury

N of 1

Maurer et al. 1990

Dronabinol

Neuropathic pain in MS

RCT (crossover)

Svendsen et al. 2004

Nabilone

Postoperative pain

RCT—1-day dosing

Beaulieu 2006

Nabilone

Chronic neuropathic pain

RCT vs. dihydrocodeine

Frank et al. 2008

Nabilone

Pain in spasticity

RCT

Wissel et al. 2006

Nabilone

Fibromyalgia

RCT

Skrabek et al. 2008

Sativex®

Neuropathic pain due to MS

RCT

Rog et al. 2005

Sativex®

Peripheral neuropathic pain

RCT

Nurmikko et al. 2007

Sativex®

Neuropathic pain due to MS

RCT with randomized
withdrawal phase

Langford et al. 2013

Sativex®

Neuropathic pain due to
brachial plexus avulsion

RCT (crossover)

Berman et al. 2004

Sativex®

Neuropathic pain

RCT (crossover)

Notcutt et al. 2004

Sativex®

Chronic cancer-related pain

RCT

Johnson et al. 2010

Sativex®

Chronic cancer-related pain

RCT

Portenoy et al. 2012

Abbreviation: RCT, randomized controlled trial.

20.5.6.1 Neuropathic pain

The approval of Sativex® in neuropathic pain is based on two published Phase 3 studies, and longterm open-label safety data. Rog et al. (2005) studied 66 patients with central neuropathic pain
due to MS, and found a highly significant reduction in pain, as assessed both by the 0–10 NRS,
and by the Neuropathic Pain Scale, significant improvement in sleep and in the patient global
impression of change. In their study of long-term use of Sativex ® in this indication, they found
that efficacy was maintained over a 1-year period, in the 34 of 63 patients who completed 1 year
of follow-up. Langford et al. (2013) conducted an interesting study with two phases. Phase A
comprised a parallel-group, randomized, placebo-controlled study of Sativex® as an add-on treatment in patients with neuropathic pain due to MS, who had failed to gain adequate relief from
existing analgesics. Phase B comprised a 13-week open-label treatment of a cohort of the patients
who completed Phase A, followed by a randomized withdrawal phase. This latter phase served
not only to explore the maintenance of efficacy in a controlled setting, but also allowed for the
investigation of any cannabis withdrawal syndrome, using previously published criteria (Budney
et al. 2004).
While the placebo-controlled parallel group phase of the study did not show a significant
difference in pain relief between Sativex® and placebo, the randomized withdrawal phase did,
thus confirming maintenance of efficacy in a population of patients who had shown efficacy in

387

388

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

short-term use. One explanation for this is that the randomized withdrawal phase included only
those patients who had previously responded to Sativex®, whereas the initial parallel group phase
included all comers—including a proportion of nonresponders. The presence of a significant
proportion of nonresponders in a study of an analgesic may introduce bias into the study, by
masking any treatment effect in background “noise.” In this setting, the mean improvement seen
in the active treatment group includes the nonresponders, thus telling us little about the size of the
response in responding patients. This phenomenon has been discussed by McQuay et al. (2008),
who mention study designs which may help avoid this negative bias. More recently, a discussion
about the value of enriched study designs, where nonresponders are excluded from the randomization process, has appeared on the US FDA website. We suspect that there will be an increasing
number of enriched study designs appearing in the literature in the coming years.
20.5.6.2 Cancer-related pain

Preclinical data show analgesic synergy between THC and opioids active at the µ-opioid receptor
(Cox et al. 2007), so the investigation of cannabinoid-based medicines in patients with cancer-­
related pain makes sense. There have been two large placebo-controlled studies published, including more than 530 patients, using Sativex® as an adjunct to opioids, in patients who have not
been able to gain optimum analgesia from strong (Step 3) opioids. Both studies have shown
that Sativex® can bring a significant reduction in pain to patients with advanced cancer in these
patients with a clear unmet medical need (Johnson et al. 2010; Portenoy et al. 2012). The earlier
study also looked at THC alone, and found no difference in pain relief from placebo, providing the
best clinical evidence that CBD is contributing to the analgesic efficacy of THC.
Neither of the two synthetic cannabis-based medicines is approved in any pain indication,
although a number of studies have been reported (see Table 20.1).

20.6 Conclusions
The two synthetic cannabinoids so far approved as medicines—dronabinol and nabilone—are
distinguished by the fact that they were developed prior to the discovery of the cannabinoid
receptors, and of the endogenous cannabinoid system. Their development therefore was not
based in any way on an understanding of their pharmacology, and they were essentially designed
to be substitutes for medicinal marijuana. Sativex®, on the other hand, was developed in the light
of the developing understanding of the endocannabinoid system, and it has become known as
an “endocannabinoid system modulator.” A review of the evidence makes it clear that there is a
more substantial body of good quality clinical trials data supporting the clinical utility of Sativex®
than of Marinol® or Cesamet®. The synthetic cannabinoids have shown longevity as marketed
products, indicating that their safety profile is acceptable in both long-term and short-term use,
even though their efficacy has been limited. The apparently greater efficacy of Sativex®, together
with its good tolerability, and our understanding of the endocannabinoid system, suggest that the
future will see the development of more cannabis-based medicines.

References
Ahmedzai, S., Carlyle, D.L., Calder, I.T., et al. (1983). Anti-emetic efficacy and toxicity of nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid, in lung cancer chemotherapy. British Journal of Cancer, 48, 657–663.
Anwar, K. and Barnes, M.P. (2009). A pilot study of a comparison between a patient scored numeric
rating scale and clinician scored measures of spasticity in multiple sclerosis. NeuroRehabilitation, 24,
333–340.

Licensed Cannabis-Based Medicines: Benefits and Risks

Aragona, M., Onesti, E., and Tomassini, V., et al. (2008). Psychopathological and cognitive effects of therapeutic cannabinoids in multiple sclerosis: a double blind, placebo controlled, crossover study. Clinical
Neuropharmacology, 32, 41–47.
Basch, E., Prestrud, A.A., Hesketh, P.J., et al. (2011) Antiemetics: American Society of Clinical Oncology
Clinical Practice Guideline Update. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 29, 4189–4198.
Beal, J.E., Olson, R., Laubenstein, L., et al. (1995). Dronabinol as a treatment for anorexia associated with
weight loss in patients with AIDS. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 10, 89–97.
Beal, J.E., Olson, R., Lefkowitz, L., et al. (1997). Long-term efficacy and safety of dronabinol for acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome-associated anorexia. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 14, 7–14.
Beaulieu, P. (2006) Effects of nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid, on postoperative pain: Les effets
de la nabilone, un cannabinoide synthetique, sur la douleur postoperatoire. Canadian Journal of
Anaesthesiology, 53, 769–75.
Berman, J.S., Symonds, C., and Birch, R. (2004). Efficacy of two cannabis based medicinal extracts for
relief of central neuropathic pain from brachial plexus avulsion: results of a randomised controlled trial.
Pain, 112, 299–306.
Bisogno, T., Hanus, L., De Petrocellis, L., et al. (2001). Molecular targets for cannabidiol and its synthetic
analogues: effect on vanilloid VR1 receptors and on the cellular uptake and enzymatic hydrolysis of
anandamide. British Journal of Pharmacology, 134, 845–852.
Budney, A.J., Hughes, J.R., Moore, B.A., and Vandrey, R. (2004). Review of the validity and significance of
cannabis withdrawal syndrome. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 1967–1977.
Buggy, D.J., Toogood, L., Maric, S., Sharpe, P., Lambert, D.G., and Rowbotham, D.J. (2003). Lack of
analgesic efficacy of oral delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in post-operative pain. Pain, 106, 169–172.
Busto, U. and Sellers, E.M. (1986). Pharmacokinetic determinants of drug abuse and dependence. A conceptual perspective. Clinical Pharmacokinetics, 11, 144–153.
Calhoun, S.R., Galloway, G.P., and Smith, D.E. (1998). Abuse potential of dronabinol (Marinol). Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs, 30, 187–196.
Carrier, E.J., Auchampach, J.A., and Hillard, C.J., (2006). Inhibition of an equilibrative nucleoside transporter by cannabidiol: a mechanism of cannabinoid immunosuppression. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103, 7895–7900.
Chang, A.E., Shiling, D.J., Stillman, R.C., et al. (1979). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as an antiemetic
in cancer patients receiving high-dose methotrexate. A prospective, randomized evaluation. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 91, 819–824.
Collin, C., Davies, P., Mutiboko, I.K., and Ratcliffe, S. (2007). Randomized controlled trial of cannabisbased medicine in spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis. European Journal of Neurology, 14, 290–296.
Collin, C., Ehler, E., Waberzinek, G., et al. (2010). A double-blind, randomized, placebocontrolled,
parallel-­group study of Sativex, in subjects with symptoms of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis.
Neurological Research, 32, 451–459.
Cox, M.L., Haller, V.L., and Welch, S.P. (2007). Synergy between Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol and morphine
in the arthritic rat. European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 567, 125–130.
Devane, W.A., Dysarz, F.A., Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S, and Howlett, A.C. (1988) Determination and
characterization of a cannabinoid receptor in rat brain. Molecular Pharmacology, 34, 605–613.
Einhorn, L.H., Nagy, C., Furnas, B., and Williams, S.D. (1981). Nabilone: an effective antiemetic in
patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21(Suppl.), 64–69.
Farrar, J.T., Troxel, A.B., Stott, C., Duncombe, P., and Jensen, M.P. (2008). Validity, reliability and clinical
importance of change in a 0-10 numeric rating scale measure of spasticity: a post hoc analysis of a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Clinical Therapeutics, 30, 974–985.
Frank, B., Serpell, M.G., Hughes, J., Matthews, J.N., and Kapur, D. (2008). Comparison of analgesic
effects and patient tolerability of nabilone and dihydrocodeine for chronic neuropathic pain: randomised, crossover, double blind study. British Medical Journal, 336, 199–201.

389

390

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Frytak, S., Moertel, C.G., O’Fallon, J., et al. (1979). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as an anti-emetic in
patients treated with cancer chemotherapy: a double comparison with prochlorperazine and a placebo.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 91, 825–830.
Gralla, R.J., Tyson, L.B., Bordin, L.A., et al. (1984). Anti-emetic therapy: a review of recent studies and
a report of a random assigned trial comparing metoclopramide with delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol.
Cancer Treatment Reports, 68, 163–172.
Herman, T.S., Einhorn, L.H., Jones, S.E., et al. (1979). Superiority of nabilone over prochlorperazine
as an antiemetic in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. New England Journal of Medicine, 300,
1295–1297.
Herman, T.S., Jones, S.E., Dean, J., et al. (1977). Nabilone: a potent antiemetic cannabinol with minimal
euphoria. Biomedicine, 27, 331–334.
Hesketh, P.J., Kris, M.G., and Grunberg, S.M. (1997). Proposal for classifying the acute emetogenicity of
cancer chemotherapy. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 15,103–109.
Hobart, J.C., Riazi, A., Lamping, D.L., Fitzpatrick, R., and Thompson, A.J. (2004). Improving the evaluation of therapeutic interventions in multiple sclerosis: development of a patient-based measure of outcome. Health Technology Assessment, 8(9).
House of Lords Science and Technology Ninth Report (Session 1997–1998). Cannabis: The Scientific and
Medical Evidence. Available at: http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/ld199798/ldselect/
ldsctech/151/15101.htm.
Johnson, J.R., Burnell-Nugent, M., Lossignol, D., Ganae-Motan, E.D., Potts, R., and Fallon, M.T. (2010).
Multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study of the efficacy, safety,
and tolerability of THC:CBD extract and THC extract in patients with intractable cancer-related pain.
Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 39, 167–179.
Jones, S.E., Durant, J.R., Greco, F.A., and Robertone, A. (1982). A multi-institutional Phase III study of
nabilone vs. placebo in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Cancer Treatment Reviews, 9,
(Suppl. 2), 45–48.
Karschner, E.L., Darwin, W.D., McMahon, R.P., et al. (2011). Subjective and physiological effects
after controlled Sativex and oral THC administration. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 89,
400–407.
Langford, R.M., Mares, J., Novotna, A., et al. (2013). A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled,
parallel-group study of THC/CBD oromucosal spray in combination with the existing treatment regimen, in the relief of central neuropathic pain in patients with multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neurology,
260, 984–997.
Lemberger, L. and Rowe, H. (1975). Clinical pharmacology of nabilone, a cannabinol derivative. Clinical
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 18, 720–26.
Maurer, M., Henn, V., Dittrich, A., and Hoffmann, A. (1990). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol shows antispastic and analgesic effects in a single case double-blind trial. European Archives of Psychological and
Clinical Neurosciences, 240, 1–4.
McQuay, H.J., Derry, S., Moore, R.A., Poulain, P., and Legout, V. (2008) Enriched enrolment with randomized withdrawal (EERW): time for a new look at clinical trial design in chronic pain. Pain, 135,
217–220.
Mechoulam, R. (1970). Marihuana chemistry. Science, 168, 1159–1166.
Meiri, E., Jhangiani, H., Vredenburgh, J.J., et al. (2007). Efficacy of dronabinol alone and in combination
with ondansetron versus ondansetron alone for delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.
Current Medical Research and Opinion, 23, 533–543.
Musty, R.E. and Rossi, R. (2001). Effects of smoked cannabis and oral Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol on nausea
and emesis after cancer chemotherapy: A review of state clinical trials. Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics,
1, 29–54.

Licensed Cannabis-Based Medicines: Benefits and Risks

Naef, M., Curatolo, M., Petersen-Felix, S., Arendt-Nielsen, L., Zbinden, A., and Brenneisen, R. (2003).
The analgesic effect of oral delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), morphine, and a THC-morphine
combination in healthy subjects under experimental conditions. Pain, 105, 79–88.
Nicholson, A.N., Turner, C., Stone, B.M., and Robson, P.J. (2004). Effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
and cannabidiol on nocturnal sleep and early-morning behavior in young adults. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 24, 305–313.
Niiranen, A. and Mattson, K. (1985). A cross-over comparison of nabilone and prochlorperazine for emesis induced by cancer chemotherapy. American Journal of Clinical Oncology, 8, 336–340.
Notcutt, W., Langford, R., Davies, P., Ratcliffe, S., and Potts, R. (2012). A placebo-controlled, randomised
withdrawal study of subjects with symptoms of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis who are receiving
long-term Sativex (nabiximols). Multiple Sclerosis Journal, 18, 219–228.
Notcutt, W., Price, M., Miller, R., et al. (2004). Initial experiences with medicinal extracts of cannabis for
chronic pain: results from 34 ‘N of 1’ studies. Anaesthesia, 59, 440–452.
Novotna, A., Mares, J., and Ratcliffe, S. (2011). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallelgroup, enriched-design study of nabiximols* (Sativex ), as add-on therapy, in subjects with refractory
spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis. European Journal of Neurology, 18, 1122–1131.
Noyes, R., Brunk, S.F., Avery, D.H., and Canter, A. (1975a). The analgesic properties of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and codeine. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 18, 84–89.
Noyes, R.Jr., Brunk, S.F., Baram, D.A., and Canter, A. (1975b). Analgesic effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 15, 139–143.
Nurmikko, T.J., Serpell, M.G., Hoggart, B., Toomey, P.J., Morlion, B.J., and Haines, D. (2007). Sativex
successfully treats neuropathic pain characterised by allodynia: a randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled clinical trial. Pain, 133, 210–220.
Oreja-Guevara, C. (2012). Clinical efficacy and effectiveness of Sativex , a combined cannabinoid medicine, in multiple sclerosis-related spasticity. Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics, 12(4 Suppl. 1), 3–8.
Orr, L.E., McKernan, J.F., and Bloome, B. (1980). Antiemetic effect of tetrahydrocannabinol, compared
with placebo and prochlorperazine in chemotherapy­associated nausea and emesis. Archives of Internal
Medicine, 140, 1431–1433.
Peyrone, M. (1844). Ueber die Einwirkung des Ammoniaks auf Platinchlorür. Annalen der Chemie und
Pharmacie, 51, 1–29.
Portenoy, R.K., Ganae-Motan, E.D., Allende, S., et al. (2012). Nabiximols for opioid-treated cancer
patients with poorly-controlled chronic pain: a randomized, placebo-controlled, graded-dose trial.
Journal of Pain, 13, 438–449.
Raft, D., Gregg, J., Ghia, J., and Harris, L. (1977). Effects of intravenous tetrahydrocannabinol on experimental and surgical pain. Psychological correlates of the analgesic response. Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, 21, 26–33.
Rog, D.J., Nurmikko, T.J., Friede, T., and Young, C.A. (2005). Randomized, controlled trial of cannabisbased medicine in central pain in multiple sclerosis. Neurology, 65, 812–819.
Sacerdote, P., Martucci, C., Vaccani, A., et al. (2005). The non-psychoactive component of marijuana cannabidiol modulates chemotaxis and IL-10 and IL-12 production of murine macrophages both in vivo
and in vitro. Journal of Neuroimmunology, 159, 97–105.
Sallan, S.E., Cronin, C., Zelen, M., and Zinberg, N.E. (1980). Antiemetics in patients receiving chemotherapy for cancer: a randomized comparison of delta­9t­ etrahydrocannabinol and prochlorperazine. New
England Journal of Medicine, 302, 135–138.
Schoedel, K.A., Chen, N., Hilliard A., et al. (2011). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover study to evaluate the subjective abuse potential and cognitive effects of nabiximols oromucosal spray in subjects with a history of recreational cannabis use. Human Psychopharmacology, 26,
224–236.

®

®

391

392

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Shakespeare, D.T., Boggild, M., and Young, C. (2003) Anti-spasticity agents for multiple sclerosis.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 4, CD001332.
Skold, C. (2000). Spasticity in spinal cord injury: self- and clinically rated intrinsic fluctuations and
intervention-­induced changes. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 81, 144–149.
Skrabek, R.Q., Galimova, L., Ethans, K., and Perry, D. (2008). Nabilone for the treatment of pain in fibromyalgia. Journal of Pain, 9, 164–173.
Slof, J. and Gras, A. (2012). Sativex in multiple sclerosis spasticity: a cost–effectiveness model. Expert
Reviews in Pharmacoeconomic Outcomes Research, 12, 1–14.
Sneed, R.C., Manning, E.L., and Hansen, C.F. (2006). Pediatric neurologic and rehabilitation rating scales. In:
R.M. Herndon (ed.). Handbook of Neurologic Rating Scales. New York: Demos Medical Publishing, p. 79.
Svendsen K.B, Jensen T.S, and Bach F.W. (2004) Does the cannabinoid dronabinol reduce central pain in
multiple sclerosis? Randomised double blind placebo controlled crossover trial. British Medical Journal,
329, 253–257.
Temple, R. (1999). Are surrogate markers adequate to assess cardiovascular disease drugs? Journal of the
American Medical Association, 282, 790–795.
Tramer, M.R., Carroll, D., Campbell, F.A., et al. (2001). Cannabinoids for control of chemotherapy
induced nausea and vomiting: quantitative systematic review. British Medical Journal, 323, 1–8.
Ungerleider, J.T., Andrysiak, T., Fairbanks, L.A., Goodnight, J., Sarna, G., and Jamison, K. (1982).
Cannabis and cancer chemotherapy. A comparison of oral delta-9-THC and prochlorperazine. Cancer,
50, 636–645.
Ungerleider, J.T., Sarna, G., Fairbanks, L.A., Goodnight, J., Andrysiak, T., and Jamison, K. (1985). THC
or compazine for the cancer chemotherapy patient—the UCLA study. Part II: patient drug preference.
American Journal of Clinical Oncology, 8, 142–147.
Wade, D.T. (2012). Evaluation of the safety and tolerability profile of Sativex : is it reassuring enough?
Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics, 12(4 Suppl. 1), 9–14.
Wade, D.T., Collin, C., Stott, C., and Duncombe, P. (2010). Meta-analysis of the efficacy and safety of
Sativex (nabiximols), on spasticity in people with multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis, 16, 701–714.
Wade, D.T., Makela, P., Robson, P., House, H., and Bateman, C. (2004). Do cannabis-based medicinal
extracts have general or specific effects on symptoms in multiple sclerosis? A double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled study on 160 patients. Multiple Sclerosis, 10, 1–8.
Wade, D.T., Robson, P. House, H., Makela, P., and Aram, J. (2003). A preliminary controlled study to
determine whether whole-plant cannabis extracts can improve intractable neurogenic symptoms.
Clinical Rehabilitation, 17, 21–29.
Ware, J.E. (1993). Measuring patients’ views: the optimum outcome measure. British Medical Journal, 306,
1429–1430.
Ware, M.A., Daeninck, P., and Maida, V. (2008). A review of nabilone in the treatment of chemotherapyinduced nausea and vomiting. Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management, 4, 99–107
Wissel, J., Haydn, T., Muller, J., et al. (2006). Low dose treatment with the synthetic cannabinoid nabilone
significantly reduces spasticity related pain: a double-blind placebo-controlled cross-over trial. Journal
of Neurology, 253, 1337–1341.
World Health Organization. (2007). Assessment of dronabinol and its stereoisomers. In: Who Expert
Committee on Drug Dependence: Thirty-Fourth Report. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Wright, S., Duncombe, P.D., and Altman, D.G. (2012). Assessment of blinding to treatment allocation
in studies of a cannabis-based medicine (Sativex ) in people with multiple sclerosis: a new approach.
Trials, 13, 189.

®

®

®

Chapter 21

Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids
Licensed as Medicines
Mark A. Ware

21.1 Introduction
Since the identification of the primary psychoactive ingredient of cannabis, delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in 1964, and the recognition of the therapeutic potential of cannabinoids in general, there has been an extensive search for synthetic molecules that mimic the
therapeutic actions of cannabinoids. The goal of such drug development has been guided by several motives: to avoid the psychoactive and abuse potential of the plant-derived cannabinoids; to
develop and protect intellectual property and therefore develop novel and profitable pharmaceutical drugs; and to improve on the pharmacological properties of the plant-based cannabinoids.
While several synthetic cannabinoids have been put into clinical trials in recent years, notably
ajulemic acid (CT-3) (Burstein 2000), levonantradol (Diasio et al. 1981), dronabinol hemisuccinate ester (Mattes et al. 1993), and dexanabinol (Maas et al. 2006), none of these compounds
has been approved for clinical use outside of research protocols and will not be discussed further.
In addition, the recent emergence of the synthetic cannabinoids “spice” and “K-2” as drugs of
abuse are not going to be discussed here as they have neither been developed nor studied for
clinical use.
This chapter explores the trajectory of the synthetic cannabinoids nabilone and dronabinol
from the first published clinical use to modern trials. The source of the material comes exclusively
from available publications indexed and listed on PubMed under the drug name(s) and from cited
reference searches.

21.2 Nabilone: the first synthetic cannabinoid
Early attempts to characterize and modify THC to develop more acceptable clinical formulation were spearheaded by Louis Lemberger, professor of pharmacology at Indiana University
School of Medicine and Director of Clinical Pharmacology at the Eli Lilly Laboratory for Clinical
Research. An early candidate, delta-6a,10a-dimethyl heptyl tetrahydrocannabinol (DMHP)
was found to have significant cardiovascular effects including tachycardia and postural hypotension (Lemberger et al. 1973, 1974). Nabilone (dl-3-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)-6,6ab 7,8,10,10a
alpha-hexahydro-1-hydroxy-6,6-dimethyl-9H dibenzo [b,d] pyran-9-one) was first reported in
1975 as a novel psychoactive crystalline benzopyran cannabinoid that was not a tetrahydrocannabinol (Stark 1975) (Fig. 21.1). Following preclinical development work in which the analgesic,
anxiolytic, and antipsychotic effects of nabilone were demonstrated, the clinical pharmacology
was described in 1975 (Lemberger and Rowe 1975). The drug was administered to healthy male
volunteers in single and ascending doses of 0.1–5 mg. Doses of 3–5 mg showed euphoric effects
similar to cannabis, with most common side effects being dizziness, drowsiness, and dry mouth.

394

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

O
OH

Fig. 21.1 Chemical structure of
nabilone.

O

Subjects felt less anxious and more relaxed. No effects on routine blood chemistry or hematology were noted. Tachycardia and postural hypotension were seen but no arrhythmias. Repeated
administration of doses up to 5 mg twice daily (b.i.d.) for 7 days showed some tolerance developing to side effects (including euphoric effects) while reduced anxiety and relaxation were noted.
21.2.1 Clinical pharmacology

Nabilone is a partial cannabinoid receptor types 1 and 2 (CB 1 and CB2) agonist that is well
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, metabolized to a carbinol with predominantly fecal
(65%) and urinary (20%) excretion (Rubin et al. 1977). The half-life of nabilone is 2 h, while that
of the metabolite was noted to be as long as 20 h.
21.2.2 Clinical effects

Early considerations for the clinical use of nabilone included antiemetic and anxiolytic effects.
The following section (21.2.2.1) outlines the major clinical studies for these effects, including
comparative trials, and describes additional exploratory trials of nabilone in other clinical conditions. Table 21.1 summarizes the clinical conditions for which nabilone has been investigated in
clinical trials to date.
21.2.3 Antiemetic effects

The observed antiemetic effects of nabilone in animals led to clinical studies in humans. Nabilone
has been evaluated in a range of clinical conditions associated with nausea including chemotherapy, radiation, surgery, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS).
In the earliest published exploratory study, nausea and vomiting induced by cancer chemotherapy was reduced in ten of 13 treatment refractory patients, with adverse effects of dizziness,
postural hypotension, impaired concentration, but minimal euphoric effects (Herman et al. 1977).
Nabilone was subsequently shown to be a superior antiemetic to prochlorperazine in a randomized controlled trial (RCT) of 113 subjects with chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
(CINV) in terms of episodes of nausea and vomiting and also for subject preference (Herman
et al. 1979); adverse events were expected and consistent with earlier studies. Antiemetic effects
were confirmed in subsequent studies, one consisting of 37 subjects in a crossover design RCT
(Steele et al. 1980), and another in which the same design was used and which enrolled 80 subjects
(Einhorn et al. 1981). Subsequent studies reported similar effects (Johansson et al. 1982; Jones
et al. 1982; Levitt 1982; Wada et al. 1982). Further uncontrolled reports continued to support a possible antiemetic role for nabilone (Cone et al. 1982; Einhorn 1982). However, despite confirming
the superiority of the antiemetic effects of nabilone compared to prochlorperazine, concerns for
the unpredictability of the adverse effects of nabilone were raised (Ahmedzai et al. 1983). An RCT

Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids Licensed as Medicines

Table 21.1 Clinical syndromes for which the use of synthetic cannabinoids has been reported
(includes case reports; not all studies have been positive; see text for details and references)
Condition

Nabilone

Dronabinol

Acute pain

✓

✓

Antiemesis

✓

✓

Anxiety

✓

✓

Appetite
Asthma

✓
✓

Blepharospasm

✓

Cancer pain

✓

✓

Cannabis dependency

✓

✓

Chronic noncancer pain

✓

Cluster headaches
Dementia-related agitation

✓

Fibromyalgia

✓

Glaucoma

✓

Huntington’s chorea

✓

✓

✓

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension

✓

Irritable bowel syndrome

✓

Isaac’s syndrome

✓

Medication overuse headache

✓

Multiple sclerosis

✓

✓

Neuropathic pain

✓

✓

Night vision

✓

Obsessive–compulsive disorder

✓

Obstructive sleep apnea

✓

Schizophrenia

✓

Sexual dysfunction

✓

Spinal cord injury

✓

Parkinson’s associated tardive dyskinesia

✓

Posttraumatic stress disorder

✓

Primary dystonia

✓

Pruritus

✓

Tremor

✓

Tourette’s syndrome

✓

Trichotillomania

✓

Upper motor neuron disease

✓

395

396

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

comparing nabilone (3 mg b.i.d. for 3 days) to chlorpromazine in cisplatin-induced nausea and
vomiting did not show superiority for nabilone although patients preferred nabilone (George et al.
1983). Side effects were also a concern in a trial of 24 cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy,
including loss of coordination and hallucinations (Niiranen and Mattson 1985), and no difference between nabilone and metoclopramide was noted in another RCT of 32 subjects on cisplatin
(Crawford and Buckman 1986). Further studies confirmed the antiemetic effects of nabilone in
patients with testicular cancer on cisplatin (Niederle et al. 1986) and compared it to domperidone
(Pomeroy et al. 1986). In an attempt to specify the effects of different approaches to different
chemotherapeutic regimens, a large trial of 80 subjects with first-episode cisplatin or carboplatin
chemotherapy showed that metoclopramide plus dexamethasone was better for cisplatin therapy
while nabilone plus prochlorperazine was better for carboplatin (Cunningham et al. 1988).
A pilot study suggested that nabilone may have effects on radiation-induced nausea and vomiting, after subjects had failed to respond to metoclopramide (Priestman and Priestman 1984),
though a subsequent RCT of 40 subjects found that nabilone was no different to metoclopramide
in this disorder (Priestman et al. 1987).
Nabilone was compared to domperidone in 23 children (aged 10 months to 17 years) with CINV,
and showed fewer vomiting episodes, reduced nausea, and patient preference (Dalzell et al. 1986).
Nabilone was found to be superior to prochlorperazine in children (aged 3.5–17.8 years) with
CINV (Chan et al. 1987). Coadministration of nabilone with dexamethasone was shown to improve
antiemetic effects and patient preference compared to nabilone alone (Niiranen and Mattson 1987).
Nabilone has been evaluated for postoperative nausea and vomiting; in an RCT of preoperative
nabilone administration in 60 patients undergoing total abdominal hysterectomy, no difference
was noted between nabilone 2 mg and metoclopramide 10 mg when given 90 min before induction of anesthesia (Lewis et al. 1994).
Case reports have suggested the antiemetic effect of nabilone may also extend to HIV/AIDS
(Flynn and Hanif 1992; Green et al. 1989).
21.2.4 Anxiolytic effects

Twenty subjects with high trait anxiety were subjected to the anxiety-provoking Stroop test and to
mirror drawing tests, and when the effects of single doses of nabilone (2 mg) and diazepam (5 mg)
on anxiety were compared it was found that diazepam had more anxiolytic properties (Nakano
et al. 1978) which was explored in further studies (Glass et al. 1979). Anxiolytic effects of nabilone
were not observed in one study of four anxious volunteers undergoing a continuous avoidance
procedure (Glass et al. 1980), in which doses of 4–5 mg were associated with hypotension, tachycardia, and sedation. Another uncontrolled study of eight anxious subjects (an extension of their
earlier study) also failed to note any anxiolytic effects (Glass et al. 1981). The first published
placebo-controlled trial to evaluate the effects of nabilone on clinical anxiety enrolled 25 subjects
and showed “dramatic” anxiolytic effects of nabilone, with expected side effects and no reported
“altered state” experiences (Fabre and McLendon 1981).
21.2.5 Open-angle glaucoma

In an open-label study, administration of 0.5–2 mg of nabilone was shown to reduce intraocular
pressure (IOP) by an average of 28% (Newell et al. 1979).
21.2.6 Asthma

Nabilone was compared to terbutaline in a study involving six healthy and six asthmatic subjects
and found to have no effect on bronchodilation in the asthmatic patients (Gong et al. 1983).

Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids Licensed as Medicines

21.2.7 Multiple sclerosis

The potential for nabilone to be used in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) was first described
in a patient who first reported benefit with herbal cannabis (Martyn et al. 1995). In an n-of-1
study, a 45-year-old male was given either nabilone (2 mg on alternate days) or placebo, alternating weekly for 4 weeks; improvements in painful muscle spasm, nocturia, and general well-being
were noted. Mild sedation but not euphoria was reported. In a separate report, the analgesic
effects of nabilone in MS were not blocked by naloxone (Hamann and Di Vadi 1999).
21.2.8 Movement disorders

A single-dose open-label study of 1 mg nabilone in a patient with Huntingdon’s disease showed
increase in choreiform movements (Muller-Vahl et al. 1999), while a subsequent case report noted
improvement in chorea in a cannabis-responsive patient (Curtis and Rickards 2006). A pilot RCT
randomized 22 subjects to 5-week crossover blocks of nabilone (1 or 2 mg) or placebo. Nabilone
significantly decreased chorea scores (Curtis et al. 2009b). A placebo-controlled RCT of nabilone
in seven patients with Parkinson’s disease showed significant reduction in levodopa-induced dyskinesia (Sieradzan et al. 2001). No effect of nabilone was noted in an RCT evaluating effects of the
cannabinoid in generalized and segmental primary dystonia (Fox et al. 2002).
21.2.9 Acute pain

In 41 patients undergoing a variety of general surgical procedures, nabilone at two dose levels (1
and 2 mg) was compared to ketoprofen and placebo given 8-hourly for 24 h postoperatively. There
was no difference in morphine consumption or other secondary outcomes, but pain at rest and
on movement was significantly increased in those receiving 2 mg nabilone compared to the other
groups (Beaulieu 2006).
In an experimental model of heat pain, nabilone at single doses of 0.5 and 1 mg was not found
to be analgesic, and reduced temporal summation was only noted in women (Redmond et al.
2008). Similar negative analgesia and antihyperalgesic effects were reported following administration of nabilone to healthy volunteers in a capsaicin-induced pain paradigm (Kalliomaki et al.
2012).
21.2.10 Chronic pain

An early case series of 20 patients with a variety of chronic noncancer pain syndromes found
that nabilone was used for pain, sleep, and nausea (Berlach et al. 2006). This was subsequently
confirmed in a crossover trial of 30 patients with treatment refractory pain in which nabilone was
added on to existing therapy (Pinsger et al. 2006). In chronic neuropathic pain, nabilone (up to 2
mg daily) was found to be inferior to dihydrocodeine (up to 240 mg daily) with more side effects
(Frank et al. 2008).
21.2.11 Fibromyalgia

Nabilone has been shown to significantly reduce pain intensity at doses of up to 1 mg b.i.d. compared to placebo in a 4-week crossover trial in 40 patients with fibromyalgia (Skrabek et al. 2008).
In an active control crossover RCT, nabilone (0.5–1.0 mg at night) was compared to low-dose
amitriptyline (10–20 mg at night) for 2 weeks in 31 fibromyalgia patients with severe insomnia,
with the main outcome being sleep quality measured using the Insomnia Severity Index. While
both drugs improved sleep, nabilone was found to result in superior sleep quality compared to
amitriptyline (Ware et al. 2010).

397

398

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

21.2.12 Upper motor neuron disease

A small RCT of 13 patients with painful spasticity associated with upper motor neuron disease
(including MS) found that nabilone, given initially as 0.5 mg daily for 1 week then 1 mg daily for
3 weeks, was superior to placebo in terms of spasticity-related pain (Wissel et al. 2006).
21.2.13 Cancer pain and symptom management

A case series of four patients with paraneoplastic night sweats reported beneficial effects (Maida
2008). In a novel retrospective study using propensity analysis, nabilone was found to improve
pain, nausea, anxiety, and distress and was associated with lower daily morphine equivalents
(Maida et al. 2008).
21.2.14 Dementia-related agitation

Nabilone was reported to successfully reduce severe agitation and aggressive behavior in an institutionalized 77-year-old male in whom other treatments had been unsuccessful; the patient was
discharged on 0.5 mg b.i.d. (Passmore 2008).
21.2.15 Posttraumatic stress disorder

The early work on nabilone as an anxiolytic drug resurfaced in the late 2000s in research investigating its potential for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. In a retrospective case series
of 47 combat veterans with severe refractory nightmares, nabilone therapy resulted in either cessation of nightmares, or reduction in intensity, in 77%, with concomitant improvements in sleep
quality (Fraser 2009).
21.2.16 Spinal cord injury

The antispasmodic effects of nabilone in patients with spinal cord injury were evaluated in a
crossover RCT of 12 subjects comparing nabilone (0.5 mg once or twice daily) to placebo for 4
weeks on each. The primary outcome, the Ashworth score (total and most affected muscle group)
was significantly reduced in the nabilone group, with mild to moderate adverse effects (Pooyania
et al. 2010).
21.2.17 Peripheral neuropathic pain

Increasing awareness of the potential for cannabinoids to be useful in neuropathic pain conditions led to a series of clinical trials. In a 6-month, open-label nonrandomized study, nabilone
or gabapentin either alone or added to existing therapy were found to reduce pain in patients
with peripheral neuropathy (Bestard and Toth 2011). Sleep, anxiety, and quality of life were also
improved, with sleep particularly improved under the nabilone condition. The same team further
evaluated the efficacy of nabilone in painful diabetic neuropathy in an enriched enrollment,
placebo-controlled RCT involving 26 subjects and found improvements in pain, anxiety, sleep,
and quality of life (Toth et al. 2012).
21.2.18 Medication-overuse headache

Nabilone (0.5 mg/day) was compared to ibuprofen (400 mg/day) in an 8-week randomized
crossover trial including 30 patients with medication overuse headache; nabilone was superior to
ibuprofen in terms of pain intensity and daily analgesic intake and was well tolerated (Pini et al.
2012).

Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids Licensed as Medicines

21.2.19 Cannabis dependence

Nabilone was found to have similar behavioral effects in cannabis users to pure THC (Lile et al.
2010). The reliability and availability of nabilone as a slow release CB1 agonist has given rise to
considerations of the use of nabilone in the treatment of cannabis dependence (Bedi et al. 2013).
21.2.20 Adverse events of nabilone

Adverse effects of nabilone are almost always more common than the comparator in clinical trials, but for the most part they are mild, self-limited, do not require additional treatment, and in
spite of them, patients consistently reported preference for nabilone in most trials where they
were asked. The most commonly reported adverse effects are dry mouth, dizziness, drowsiness,
postural hypotension, and tachycardia. There are no known clinically important drug–drug interactions, and neither nabilone nor its metabolites test positive in urine drug tests for THC.
21.2.21 Endocrine effects

No effect of nabilone on prolactin levels has been noted (Mendelson et al. 1984).
21.2.22 Visual effects

Nabilone has been show to impair binocular depth inversion, a model of impaired perception in
psychotic states (Leweke et al. 2000).
21.2.23 Abuse liability

While early studies found no suggestion of reinforcing effects of nabilone (Mendelson and Mello
1984) increases in prescriptions and off-label use of nabilone in the 2000s, coupled with concerns
about opioid abuse, led to investigations about whether nabilone was emerging as a drug of abuse.
A series of media and Internet searches and interviews with major law enforcement, pain management, and addictions experts in 2009 were unable to find any evidence of systematic nabilone
abuse, or that nabilone had any street value (Ware and St Arnaud-Trempe 2010).
21.2.24 Cognitive effects

No effect of nabilone (2 mg/day) was noted on five parameters of psychomotor performance
(reaction time, working memory, divided attention, psychomotor speed, and mental flexibility) in
an RCT involving six patients with MS for whom nabilone was used for 4 weeks for pain and spasticity (Kurzthaler et al. 2005). Nabilone at doses of 1–3 mg in healthy male volunteers produced
cognitive effects including deficits in attention, working and episodic memory, and self-ratings of
alertness (Wesnes et al. 2010).

21.3 Dronabinol: synthetic THC
21.3.1 Introduction

Since first being characterized by Mechoulam and Gaoni in 1964 (Gaoni and Mechoulam 1964)
the pure form of THC (the pharmacological name is dronabinol) has been studied in humans
since the late 1960s (Isbell et al. 1967) (Fig. 21.2). Initial studies set out mainly to describe its
pharmacological properties in various forms and investigate its effects on human cognition
and behavior. Recent reviews of the pharmacokinetics of dronabinol suggest that following oral
administration, psychotropic and clinical effects appear within 30–90 min, reach their maximum

399

400

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

OH

Fig. 21.2 Chemical structure of
dronabinol.

O

after 2–3 h, and last for about 4–12 h (Goodwin et al. 2006; Grotenhermen 2003, 2004; McGilveray
2005). Dronabinol is metabolized by the liver and metabolites are excreted in the feces and urine;
one of these metabolites, THC-COOH, is the primary compound detected in urinary drug testing
(Gustafson et al. 2003) and plasma (Ferreiros et al. 2013).
Dronabinol administered by vaporization has been investigated and found to mimic smoked
cannabis THC pharmacokinetics (Hazekamp et al. 2006); attempts to increase speed of absorption following oral administration have also been explored (Klumpers et al. 2012).
21.3.2 Analgesia

The first attempts to investigate analgesic effects began in 1975 with small studies showing analgesic properties of dronabinol in patients with cancer pain but dose-limiting side effects were noted
(Noyes et al. 1975a, 1975b). Studies of dronabinol for postoperative pain have not demonstrated
analgesic or opioid-sparing effects (Seeling et al. 2006). However a single- and multiple-dose
study comparing dronabinol (10 and 20 mg) to placebo in patients with severe low back pain
despite stable opioid therapy showed significant additive analgesic effects of dronabinol (Narang
et al. 2008).
21.3.3 Antiemetic effects

Antiemetic properties of dronabinol were noted early on in patients with CINV (Ekert et al.
1979; Sallan et al. 1975), with concerns about dose-related adverse events (Colls et al. 1980).
The antiemetic effects of dronabinol were confirmed in an RCT of 84 subjects that, despite
high dropout rates, suggested that dronabinol was superior to prochlorperazine in refractory
chemotherapy-­induced (methotrexate) nausea and vomiting (Sallan et al. 1980). While it was
suggested that the antiemetic effects were restricted to certain types of chemotherapy (Chang
et al. 1981), further studies showed equivalence to haloperidol in other emetic paradigms (Neidhart
et al. 1981) as well as to prochlorperazine (Orr and McKernan 1981; Ungerleider et al. 1982).
In light of these trials, dronabinol was considered at that time to represent “a major advance in
antiemetic therapy” (Poster et al. 1981).
These studies led to the approval of dronabinol by the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) in 1985 for CINV. Further confirmatory evidence emerged in the 1990s (Lane et al. 1990).
A systematic review in 2001 concluded “cannabinoids . . . may be useful as mood-enhancing
adjuvants for controlling chemotherapy related sickness” (Tramer et al. 2001); this conclusion is
supported by a meta-analysis conducted in 2008 (Machado Rocha et al. 2008).
A combination of prochlorperazine (25 mg rectally) and dronabinol (5 mg orally) given prophylactically has been found to reduce postoperative nausea and vomiting in a retrospective study
of women undergoing breast surgery (Layeeque et al. 2006). In a placebo-controlled RCT of 66
patients, dronabinol has been shown to be as effective as ondansetron in the treatment of CINV
(Meiri et al. 2007).

Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids Licensed as Medicines

21.3.4 Appetite

Orexigenic effects were not seen in an early small study of dronabinol in 11 women with primary
anorexia nervosa (Gross et al. 1983). However the appetite-stimulating effects of cannabis, and
its use by anorexic patients during the emerging epidemic of HIV/AIDS, led to further studies
(Beal et al. 1995; Gorter et al. 1992; Struwe et al. 1993) and a second FDA approval for this indication in the early 1990s. Longer-term studies suggested the appetite-stimulating effects could
be maintained for up to 1 year (Beal et al. 1997). Comparative studies with megestrol acetate
did not show superiority of dronabinol (Jatoi et al. 2002; Timpone et al. 1997). Increases in food
intake have been noted following dronabinol use in HIV-positive marijuana smokers (Haney
et al. 2005). A retrospective study of patients living with HIV/AIDS receiving dronabinol reported an association between dronabinol use and improved appetite and weight gain (Dejesus et
al. 2007), which was supported in a subsequent trial (Haney et al. 2007). A small RCT of seven
HIV-positive marijuana smokers confirmed that 10 mg dronabinol given four times daily over
a 16-day period resulted in increased caloric intake (and improved sleep) over the first 8 days,
but it was suggested that cannabis-experienced patients required higher doses of dronabinol to
achieve this effect and that tolerance to these effects developed in the second 8 days of the study
(Bedi et al. 2010).
Appetite-stimulating effects of dronabinol have also been noted in case series of patients with
cancer-induced anorexia (Walsh et al. 2005) and metastatic melanoma (Zutt et al. 2006). In addition, a trial comparing dronabinol (2.5 mg b.i.d.) to placebo in 21 patients with advanced cancer,
poor appetite, and chemosensory alterations found that dronabinol improved chemosensory perception along with protein caloric intake and pre-meal appetite over an 18-day period (Brisbois
et al. 2011).
Anorexia associated with aging has also been shown to increase weight in long-term care
elderly patients; intriguingly, a lack of response to dronabinol (weight gain) was associated with
increased risk of death (Wilson et al. 2007).
21.3.5 Asthma

Bronchodilatory effects of oral dronabinol were not found in asthmatic patients (Abboud and
Sanders 1976) although such effects of inhaled THC had been shown (Tashkin et al. 1975;
Williams et al. 1976).
21.3.6 Blepharospasm

There is a single case report of a woman whose painful intractable blepharospasm (painful contractions of the periorbital muscles) was relieved by 25 mg dronabinol daily over several weeks,
and was well tolerated (Gauter et al. 2004).
21.3.7 Cannabis dependence

The use of dronabinol as a treatment for cannabis dependence has been suggested following
a report of two cases (Levin and Kleber 2008), but a subsequent large (n = 156) 12-week RCT
found no difference between dronabinol at doses of 20 mg b.i.d. and placebo in rates of cannabis
abstinence in cannabis-dependent subjects, though improved retention and fewer withdrawal
symptoms were noted in the dronabinol group (Levin et al. 2011). It has been suggested, however,
that nabilone may be superior to dronabinol for this purpose because of its superior bioavailability (Bedi et al. 2013). Doses of up to 120 mg/day of dronabinol have been used to treat cannabis
withdrawal symptoms (Vandrey et al. 2013).

401

402

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

21.3.8 Cluster headaches

There has been one report of successful treatment of cluster headaches with 5 mg doses of dronabinol (Robbins et al. 2009).
21.3.9 Dementia

Open-label studies of patients with severe dementia have reported that doses of 2.5 mg dronabinol daily can reduce nighttime motor activity and agitation (Mahlberg and Walther 2007; Walther
et al. 2006). These findings were not supported by a recent Cochrane review which found no
evidence to support the use of cannabinoids in dementia or related symptoms (Krishnan et al.
2009); however case reports of the successful use of dronabinol for agitation in dementia continue
to appear (Walther et al. 2011).
21.3.10 Gastrointestinal effects

Dronabinol (5 mg b.i.d.) has been shown to reduce gastric emptying in healthy subjects, particularly in females, though fasting gastric volumes were increased in males on dronabinol (Esfandyari
et al. 2006). Dronabinol (single dose of 7.5 mg) has also been shown to reduce postprandial
colonic mobility and tone in healthy human volunteers (Esfandyari et al. 2007). In irritable bowel
syndrome (IBS), studies are mixed: at doses of 5–10 mg, dronabinol did not result in changes in
visceral perception of rectal distension in one small trial of patients (n = 10) with IBS and healthy
volunteers (n = 12) (Klooker et al. 2011), but a second placebo-controlled trial found that 2.5–5
mg dronabinol did reduce fasting colonic motility in 75 patients with IBS (Wong et al. 2011); these
authors also suggested that CB1 receptor and fatty acid amide hydroxylase genetic polymorphisms
could explain interindividual differences (Wong et al. 2012).
21.3.11 Glaucoma

There have been reports that neither oral (Tiedeman et al., 1981) nor topical (Jay and Green 1983)
dronabinol appears to reduce IOP, though another study of eight healthy volunteers administered
with 7.5 mg dronabinol did show reduced IOP and increased retinal hemodynamics (Plange
et al. 2007).
21.3.12 Intracranial hypertension

A single case report has been published of complete resolution of symptoms and signs in a woman
with idiopathic intracranial hypertension following treatment with dronabinol 10 mg b.i.d. followed by 5 mg b.i.d. (Raby et al. 2006).
21.3.13 Movement disorders

Dronabinol was reportedly effective in reducing a hyperkinetic movement disorder in a pregnant
woman (Farooq et al. 2009). Use of dronabinol from 2.5 mg titrated up to 20 mg/day resulted
in dramatic and sustained benefit in a patient with Isaac’s syndrome, a peripheral motor nerve
hyperactivity syndrome (Meyniel et al. 2011).
21.3.14 Neuropathic pain

Strong preclinical evidence of the antinociceptive properties of dronabinol have led to several
investigations of this drug in the management of central and peripheral neuropathic pain. Two
adolescents with intractable neuropathic pain were treated short term with dronabinol (5–25

Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids Licensed as Medicines

mg/day) with improvements in pain, function, mood, and sleep (Rudich et al. 2003). The first
RCT of dronabinol for neuropathic pain was conducted in 24 patients with central neuropathic
pain due to MS; the study found dronabinol (maximum dose 10 mg/day) was superior to placebo
with respect to pain intensity and quality of life (Svendsen et al. 2004). Dronabinol at a dose of
5–20 mg/day was compared to diphenhydramine in seven patients with spinal cord injury; there
was no difference found between the effects of the two drugs on pain intensity (Rintala et al.
2010).
21.3.15 Obsessive–compulsive disorder

There is one report suggesting that a patient with refractory obsessive–compulsive disorder
responded to oral dronabinol (Schindler et al. 2008).
21.3.16 Obstructive sleep apnea

A small open-label proof-of-concept study suggested that dronabinol 2.5–10 mg once daily over
3 weeks improved the Apnea/Hypoapnea Index in 17 adults with obstructive sleep apnea without
affecting sleep architecture (Prasad et al. 2013).
21.3.17 Pruritus

The itch (pruritus) caused by cholestatic liver disease was found to respond to 2.5–5 mg doses of
dronabinol in three patients with intractable pruritus who had failed to respond to other therapies
(Neff et al. 2002).
21.3.18 Schizophrenia

Despite the known association between cannabis and the onset of psychosis in predisposed adolescents, dronabinol has been used in patients with schizophrenia who report improvement of
psychotic symptoms with smoked cannabis; oral dronabinol reduced core psychotic symptoms in
three of four subjects (Schwarcz et al. 2009). Additional case reports of improvement in refractory
psychosis following dronabinol therapy (Schwarcz and Karajgi 2010) suggest that this issue is not
a straightforward one.
21.3.19 Spasticity

In very small preliminary studies, the effects of dronabinol on spasticity associated with MS
were first reported in 1981 (Petro and Ellenberger 1981), and on tremor in 1983 (Clifford 1983).
Antispasmodic effects were confirmed in patients with refractory MS-associated spasticity
(Ungerleider et al. 1987). Initial reports suggested dronabinol may have antispasmodic effects
in patients with spinal cord injury (Kogel et al. 1995) and other disorders (Brenneisen et al.
1996).
21.3.20 Tourette’s syndrome

A small RCT of 24 subjects with intractable tics due to Tourette’s syndrome found that oral doses
of dronabinol given over 6 weeks was superior to placebo in reducing tic frequency (Muller-Vahl
2003), but a recent Cochrane review suggests that despite two small positive trials, the evidence
base is not yet strong enough to support the use of dronabinol for tics and obsessive–compulsive
behavior in people with Tourette’s syndrome (Curtis et al. 2009a).

403

404

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

21.3.21 Trichotillomania

Compulsive hair-pulling behavior refractory to conventional treatment was shown to respond to
dronabinol (2.5–15 mg/day) in a 12-week open-label trial involving 14 women, and did not result
in negative cognitive effects (Grant et al. 2011).
21.3.22 Sexual dysfunction

There has been one case report of dronabinol improving sexual dysfunction secondary to pharmacotherapy for bipolar disorder; use of 10 mg dronabinol by a 43-year-old woman 1 h before
sex improved all aspects of sexual function and effectiveness was sustained over a 2-year period
of follow-up (Salerian 2004).
21.3.23 Adverse events of dronabinol

Most clinical reports of dronabinol conclude with a cautionary message about adverse events. It
is clear that side effects of dronabinol are consistent and dose dependent, to a large part expected,
and that these effects may be the limiting factor in patient compliance. It appears that rewarding,
euphoric properties of dronabinol are uncommon in clinical practice, and that, like nabilone, it is
not a drug with street value and likelihood of diversion.
21.3.24 Abuse liability

Concerns regarding the abuse potential of dronabinol led to an investigation of dronabinol as a
street drug or abused substance, through both a search of multiple sources including literature
reviews, and the conducting of interviews with law enforcement, addictions specialists, and others. No evidence for the abuse or diversion of dronabinol was found (Calhoun et al. 1998). Modest
reinforcing effects of dronabinol have been shown in laboratory paradigms of choice (Hart et al.
2005). Dronabinol (at a single dose of either 20 or 40 mg) was compared to the cannabis-based
medicine, nabiximols, and placebo in 23 healthy cannabis-experienced volunteers, and showed
some evidence of abuse liability on psychomotor and cognitive tests after 24 h compared to placebo (Schoedel et al. 2011).
21.3.25 Drug interactions

Short-term use of dronabinol (14 days) has not been found to have clinically meaningful effects
on plasma levels of the antiretroviral drugs indinavir and nelfinavir (Kosel et al. 2002).
21.3.26 Effects on driving

Studies of oral dronabinol intake suggest that there are impairing effects on roadside and tracking tests at medium (16.5 mg) and high (45.7 mg) doses of dronabinol in healthy volunteers,
though volunteers under these conditions had reduced willingness to drive (Menetrey et al. 2005).
Driving test measures such as standard deviation of lateral position (SDLP; weaving) have been
shown to be worsened by dronabinol (10–20 mg); in light cannabis users but not in heavy users;
the standard field sobriety test (SFST) was not sensitive to dronabinol effects (Bosker et al. 2012).
21.3.27 Gynecomastia

Enlargement of the breasts has been reported in a male patient prescribed dronabinol 5 mg daily
for severe intractable nausea; prolactin levels and other endocrine test data were normal (Allen
et al. 2007).

Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids Licensed as Medicines

21.3.28 Immunosuppressive effects

Despite concerns about the potential immunosuppressive effects of cannabinoids from in vivo and
in vitro studies, no significant differences have been observed between dronabinol, smoked cannabis, and placebo in a study evaluating the immunological effects of these drugs in HIV-positive
patients on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). These included results obtained from
assays of immune phenotype (including flow cytometric quantitation of T-cell subpopulations, B
cells, and natural killer (NK) cells) and immune function (including assays for induced cytokine
production, NK-cell function, and lymphoproliferation) (Bredt et al. 2002). Neither smoked cannabis nor oral dronabinol (2.5 mg three times daily) had negative effects on viral load, plasma
levels of antiretroviral drugs, CD4+ or CD8+ cell counts in HIV-infected adults in an RCT of 67
subjects (22 randomized to dronabinol) over a 21-day period (Abrams et al. 2003).
21.3.29 Pediatric use

Reports of dronabinol use in pediatric cases have not resulted in major safety concerns; in eight
adolescents with a variety of spastic and epileptic conditions dronabinol at doses of 0.04–0.12 mg/
kg were generally well tolerated (Lorenz 2004).
21.3.30 Visual effects

Dronabinol, like nabilone, has been shown to impair binocular depth inversion, a visual process
requiring top-down processing of visual sensory data (Leweke et al. 1999). Oral dronabinol (up to
20 mg) has been shown to improve dark adaptometry and scotopic sensitivity (Russo et al. 2004).

21.4 Discussion
A number of observations can be made from this review of 40 years of published clinical experience with the synthetic cannabinoids nabilone and dronabinol. The number of clinical syndromes in which both drugs have been used and reported to be effective, either in case reports,
case series, or clinical trials, goes far beyond their indications as antiemetics (both) and appetite
stimulant (dronabinol). The range of symptoms and disorders that are listed in Table 21.1 can
only be explained by the effects of a drug class on a ubiquitous substrate, the endocannabinoid
system, which is discussed in detail elsewhere in this book. The range of conditions also reflects
reports by patients’ use of herbal cannabis for similar purposes (Ware et al. 2005) and lists of
conditions for which cannabis is approved for medical purposes in US states (Hoffmann and
Weber 2010).
Nabilone and dronabinol are old compounds, no longer protected by patents, and are available
on prescription in the UK, Canada, US, and elsewhere. Generic formulations are now available
which has reduced the price of these medications making them more accessible. However, in the
ongoing debate about medical marijuana, the potential utility of these synthetic cannabinoids is
rarely mentioned. It is worth reflecting on why this might be.
The side effect profile of the synthetic cannabinoids continues to be a major barrier to widespread use, and it is widely reported that patients prefer herbal cannabis to the synthetic versions.
This may be a difference of mode of administration (herbal cannabis is most often smoked) but
may also be a result of the complex botanical composition of herbal cannabis giving differing
pharmacological effects to single synthetic agents (Russo 2011; Russo and Guy 2006). Clinical
experience suggests that if starting doses of synthetic cannabinoids are low, and dose escalation is
handled carefully, tolerance may develop to many of the early mild and moderate adverse effects.

405

406

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

As with many cannabinoids, the side effect of drowsiness may be harnessed to improve sleep, and
dosing is often initiated at night for this purpose.
In conclusion, synthetic cannabinoids are accessible and relatively safe drugs with 40 years
of therapeutic history. Side effects are predictable, dose related, and typically mild to moderate.
While these oral agents have not been approved with formal indications beyond antiemesis and
appetite stimulation, the large number of conditions for which they have been investigated and
the existence of these compounds on many national formularies suggests that for many clinicians
treating intractable chronic and debilitating diseases and symptoms, synthetic cannabinoid agents
remain a potential therapeutic option provided patients are informed of potential side effects and
are carefully monitored.

References
Abboud, R.T. and Sanders, H.D. (1976). Effect of oral administration of delta-tetrahydrocannabinol on
airway mechanics in normal and asthmatic subjects. Chest, 70, 480–485.
Abrams, D.I., Hilton, J.F., Leiser, R.J., et al. (2003). Short-term effects of cannabinoids in patients with
HIV-1 infection: a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Annals of Internal Medicine, 139,
258–266.
Ahmedzai, S., Carlyle, D.L., Calder, I.T., and Moran, F. (1983). Anti-emetic efficacy and toxicity of
nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid, in lung cancer chemotherapy. British Journal of Cancer, 48, 657–663.
Allen, R.C., Wallace, A.M., and Royce, M. (2007). Marinol-induced gynecomastia: a case report. American
Journal of Medicine, 120, e1.
Beal, J.E., Olson, R., Laubenstein, L., et al. (1995). Dronabinol as a treatment for anorexia associated with
weight loss in patients with AIDS. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 10, 89–97.
Beal, J.E., Olson, R., Lefkowitz, L., et al. (1997). Long-term efficacy and safety of dronabinol for acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome-associated anorexia. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 14, 7–14.
Beaulieu, P. (2006). Effects of nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid, on postoperative pain. Canadian Journal
of Anaesthesia, 53, 769–775.
Bedi, G., Cooper, Z.D., and Haney, M. (2013). Subjective, cognitive and cardiovascular dose-effect profile
of nabilone and dronabinol in marijuana smokers. Addiction Biology, 18, 872–881.
Bedi, G., Foltin, R.W., Gunderson, E.W., et al. (2010). Efficacy and tolerability of high-dose dronabinol
maintenance in HIV-positive marijuana smokers: a controlled laboratory study. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin), 212, 675–686.
Berlach, D.M., Shir, Y., and Ware, M.A. (2006). Experience with the synthetic cannabinoid nabilone in
chronic noncancer pain. Pain Medicine, 7, 25–29.
Bestard, J.A. and Toth, C.C. (2011). An open-label comparison of nabilone and gabapentin as adjuvant
therapy or monotherapy in the management of neuropathic pain in patients with peripheral neuropathy.
Pain Practitioner, 11, 353–368.
Bosker, W.M., Kuypers, K.P., Theunissen, E.L., et al. (2012). Medicinal delta(9) -tetrahydrocannabinol
(dronabinol) impairs on-the-road driving performance of occasional and heavy cannabis users but is
not detected in Standard Field Sobriety Tests. Addiction, 107, 1837–1844.
Bredt, B.M., Higuera-Alhino, D., Shade, S.B., et al. (2002). Short-term effects of cannabinoids on immune
phenotype and function in HIV-1-infected patients. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 42, 82S–89S.
Brenneisen, R., Egli, A., Elsohly, M.A., Henn, V., and Spiess, Y. (1996). The effect of orally and rectally
administered delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol on spasticity: a pilot study with 2 patients. International
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 34, 446–452.
Brisbois, T.D., De Kock, I.H., Watanabe, S.M., et al. (2011). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol may palliate
altered chemosensory perception in cancer patients: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled pilot trial. Annals of Oncology, 22, 2086–2093.

Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids Licensed as Medicines

Burstein, S.H. (2000). Ajulemic acid (CT3): a potent analog of the acid metabolites of THC. Current
Pharmaceutical Design, 6, 1339–1345.
Calhoun, S.R., Galloway, G.P., and Smith, D.E. (1998). Abuse potential of dronabinol (Marinol). Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs, 30, 187–196.
Chan, H.S., Correia, J.A., and Macleod, S.M. (1987). Nabilone versus prochlorperazine for control of cancer chemotherapy-induced emesis in children: a double-blind, crossover trial. Pediatrics, 79, 946–952.
Chang, A.E., Shiling, D.J., Stillman, R.C., et al. (1981). A prospective evaluation of delta-9-­
tetrahydrocannabinol as an antiemetic in patients receiving adriamycin and cytoxan chemotherapy.
Cancer, 47, 1746–1751.
Clifford, D.B. (1983). Tetrahydrocannabinol for tremor in multiple sclerosis. Annals of Neurology, 13,
669–671.
Colls, B.M., Ferry, D.G., Gray, A.J., Harvey, V.J., and McQueen, E.G. (1980). The antiemetic activity
of tetrahydrocannabinol versus metoclopramide and thiethylperazine in patients undergoing cancer
chemotherapy. New Zealand Medical Journal, 91, 449–451.
Cone, L.A., Greene, D.S., and Helm, N.A. (1982). Use of nabilone in the treatment of chemotherapyinduced vomiting in an outpatient setting. Cancer Treatment Reviews, 9(Suppl. B), 63–70.
Crawford, S.M. and Buckman, R. (1986). Nabilone and metoclopramide in the treatment of nausea and
vomiting due to cisplatinum: a double blind study. Medical Oncology and Tumor Pharmacotherapy, 3,
39–42.
Cunningham, D., Bradley, C.J., Forrest, G.J., et al. (1988). A randomized trial of oral nabilone and
prochlorperazine compared to intravenous metoclopramide and dexamethasone in the treatment of
nausea and vomiting induced by chemotherapy regimens containing cisplatin or cisplatin analogues.
European Journal of Cancer and Clinical Oncology, 24, 685–689.
Curtis, A., Clarke, C.E., and Rickards, H.E. (2009a). Cannabinoids for Tourette’s syndrome. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, 4, CD006565.
Curtis, A., Mitchell, I., Patel, S., Ives, N., and Rickards, H. (2009b). A pilot study using nabilone for symptomatic treatment in Huntington’s disease. Movement Disorders, 24, 2254–2259.
Curtis, A. and Rickards, H. (2006). Nabilone could treat chorea and irritability in Huntington’s disease.
Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 18, 553–554.
Dalzell, A.M., Bartlett, H., and Lilleyman, J.S. (1986). Nabilone: an alternative antiemetic for cancer chemotherapy. Archives of Diseases in Childhood, 61, 502–505.
Dejesus, E., Rodwick, B.M., Bowers, D., Cohen, C.J. and Pearce, D. (2007). Use of dronabinol improves
appetite and reverses weight loss in HIV/AIDS-infected patients. Journal of the International Association
of Physicians in AIDS Care (Chicago), 6, 95–100.
Diasio, R.B., Ettinger, D.S., and Satterwhite, B.E. (1981). Oral levonantradol in the treatment of
chemotherapy-­induced emesis: preliminary observations. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 81S–85S.
Einhorn, L. (1982). Nabilone: an effective antiemetic agent in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy.
Cancer Treatment Reviews, 9(Suppl. B), 55–61.
Einhorn, L.H., Nagy, C., Furnas, B., and Williams, S.D. (1981). Nabilone: an effective antiemetic in
patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 64S–69S.
Ekert, H., Waters, K.D., Jurk, I.H., Mobilia, J., and Loughnan, P. (1979). Amelioration of cancer chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting by delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Medical Journal of Australia, 2,
657–659.
Esfandyari, T., Camilleri, M., Busciglio, I., et al. (2007). Effects of a cannabinoid receptor agonist on
colonic motor and sensory functions in humans: a randomized, placebo-controlled study. American
Journal of Physiology: Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 293, G137–G145.
Esfandyari, T., Camilleri, M., Ferber, I., et al. (2006). Effect of a cannabinoid agonist on gastrointestinal
transit and postprandial satiation in healthy human subjects: a randomized, placebo-controlled study.
Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 18, 831–838.

407

408

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Fabre, L.F. and McLendon, D. (1981). The efficacy and safety of nabilone (a synthetic cannabinoid) in the
treatment of anxiety. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 377S–382S.
Farooq, M.U., Ducommun, E., and Goudreau, J. (2009). Treatment of a hyperkinetic movement disorder
during pregnancy with dronabinol. Parkinsonism and Related Disorders, 15, 249–251.
Ferreiros, N., Labocha, S., Walter, C., Lotsch, J., and Geisslinger, G. (2013). Simultaneous and sensitive
LC-MS/MS determination of tetrahydrocannabinol and metabolites in human plasma. Analytical and
Bioanalytical Chemistry, 405, 1399–1406.
Flynn, J. and Hanif, N. (1992). Nabilone for the management of intractable nausea and vomiting in terminally staged AIDS. Journal of Palliative Care, 8, 46–47.
Fox, S.H., Kellett, M., Moore, A.P., Crossman, A.R., and Brotchie, J.M. (2002). Randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial to assess the potential of cannabinoid receptor stimulation in the treatment of dystonia. Movement Disorders, 17, 145–149.
Frank, B., Serpell, M.G., Hughes, J., Matthews, J.N., and Kapur, D. (2008). Comparison of analgesic
effects and patient tolerability of nabilone and dihydrocodeine for chronic neuropathic pain: randomised, crossover, double blind study. British Medical Journal, 336, 199–201.
Fraser, G.A. (2009). The use of a synthetic cannabinoid in the management of treatment-resistant nightmares in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). CNS Neuroscience and Therapeutics, 15, 84–88.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964). Isolation, structure and partial synthesis of an active constituent of
hashish. Journal of the American Chemistry Society, 86, 1646–1647.
Gauter, B., Rukwied, R., and Konrad, C. (2004). Cannabinoid agonists in the treatment of blepharospasm
– a case report study. Neuroendocrinology Letters, 25, 45–48.
George, M., Pejovic, M.H., Thuaire, M., Kramar, A., and Wolff, J.P. (1983). [Randomized comparative trial of a new anti-emetic: nabilone, in cancer patients treated with cisplatin]. Biomedicine and
Pharmacotherapy, 37, 24–27.
Glass, R.M., Uhlenhuth, E.H., and Hartel, F.W. (1979). The effects of nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid,
on anxious human volunteers [proceedings]. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 15, 88–90.
Glass, R.M., Uhlenhuth, E.H., Hartel, F.W., Schuster, C.R., and Fischman, M.W. (1980). A single dose
study of nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 71, 137–142.
Glass, R.M., Uhlenhuth, E.H., Hartel, F.W., Schuster, C.R., and Fischman, M.W. (1981). Single-dose
study of nabilone in anxious volunteers. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 383S–396S.
Gong, H., Jr., Tashkin, D.P., and Calvarese, B. (1983). Comparison of bronchial effects of nabilone and
terbutaline in healthy and asthmatic subjects. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 23, 127–133.
Goodivin, R.S., Gustafson, R.A., Barnes, A., et al. (2006). Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, 11-hydroxy-Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol and 11-nor-9-carboxy-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in human plasma after controlled oral administration of cannabinoids. Therapeutic Drug Monitoring, 28, 545–551.
Gorter, R., Seefried, M., and Volberding, P. (1992). Dronabinol effects on weight in patients with HIV
infection. AIDS, 6, 127.
Grant, J.E., Odlaug, B.L., Chamberlain, S.R., and Kim, S.W. (2011). Dronabinol, a cannabinoid agonist,
reduces hair pulling in trichotillomania: a pilot study. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 218, 493–502.
Green, S.T., Nathwani, D., Goldberg, D.J., and Kennedy, D.H. (1989). Nabilone as effective therapy for
intractable nausea and vomiting in AIDS. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 28, 494–495.
Gross, H., Ebert, M.H., Faden, V.B., et al. (1983). A double-blind trial of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in
primary anorexia nervosa. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 3, 165–71.
Grotenhermen, F. (2003). Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of cannabinoids. Clinical
Pharmacokinetics, 42, 327–360.
Grotenhermen, F. (2004). Pharmacology of cannabinoids. Neuroendocrinology Letters, 25, 14–23.
Gustafson, R.A., Levine, B., Stout, P.R., et al. (2003). Urinary cannabinoid detection times after controlled
oral administration of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol to humans. Clinical Chemistry, 49, 1114–1124.

Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids Licensed as Medicines

Hamann, W. and Di Vadi, P.P. (1999). Analgesic effect of the cannabinoid analogue nabilone is not mediated by opioid receptors. Lancet, 353, 560.
Haney, M., Gunderson, E.W., Rabkin, J., et al. (2007). Dronabinol and marijuana in HIV-positive marijuana smokers. Caloric intake, mood, and sleep. Journal of the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome,
45, 545–554.
Haney, M., Rabkin, J., Gunderson, E., and Foltin, R.W. (2005). Dronabinol and marijuana in HIV(+)
marijuana smokers: acute effects on caloric intake and mood. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 181,
170–178.
Hart, C.L., Haney, M., Vosburg, S.K., Comer, S.D., and Foltin, R.W. (2005). Reinforcing effects of oral
delta9-THC in male marijuana smokers in a laboratory choice procedure. Psychopharmacology (Berlin),
181, 237–243.
Hazekamp, A., Ruhaak, R., Zuurman, L., Van Gerven, J., and Verpoorte, R. (2006). Evaluation of a
vaporizing device (Volcano) for the pulmonary administration of tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 95, 1308–1317.
Herman, T.S., Einhorn, L.H., Jones, S.E., et al. (1979). Superiority of nabilone over prochlorperazine
as an antiemetic in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. New England Journal of Medicine, 300,
1295–1297.
Herman, T.S., Jones, S.E., Dean, J., et al. (1977). Nabilone: a potent antiemetic cannabinol with minimal
euphoria. Biomedicine, 27, 331–334.
Hoffmann, D.E. and Weber, E. (2010). Medical marijuana and the law. New England Journal of Medicine,
362, 1453–1457.
Isbell, H., Gorodetzsky, C.W., Jasinski, D., et al. (1967). Effects of (–)delta-9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol
in man. Psychopharmacologia, 11, 184–188.
Jatoi, A., Windschitl, H.E., Loprinzi, C.L., et al. (2002). Dronabinol versus megestrol acetate versus combination therapy for cancer-associated anorexia: a North Central Cancer Treatment Group study. Journal
of Clinical Oncology, 20, 567–573.
Jay, W.M. and Green, K. (1983). Multiple-drop study of topically applied 1% delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol
in human eyes. Archives of Ophthalmology, 101, 591–593.
Johansson, R., Kilkku, P., and Groenroos, M. (1982). A double-blind, controlled trial of nabilone vs.
prochlorperazine for refractory emesis induced by cancer chemotherapy. Cancer Treatment Reviews,
9(Suppl. B), 25–33.
Jones, S.E., Durant, J.R., Greco, F.A., and Robertone, A. (1982). A multi-institutional Phase III study
of nabilone vs. placebo in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Cancer Treatment Reviews,
9(Suppl. B), 45–48.
Kalliomaki, J., Philipp, A., Baxendale, J., et al. (2012). Lack of effect of central nervous system-active doses
of nabilone on capsaicin-induced pain and hyperalgesia. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and
Physiology, 39, 336–342.
Klooker, T.K., Leliefeld, K.E., Van Den Wijngaard, R.M., and Boeckxstaens, G.E. (2011). The cannabinoid receptor agonist delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol does not affect visceral sensitivity to rectal distension in healthy volunteers and IBS patients. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 23, 30–35, e2.
Klumpers, L.E., Beumer, T.L., Van Hasselt, J.G., et al. (2012). Novel Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol formulation
Namisol has beneficial pharmacokinetics and promising pharmacodynamic effects. British Journal of
Clinical Pharmacology, 74, 42–53.
Kogel, R.W., Johnson, P.B., Chintam, R., Robinson, C.J., and Nemchausky, B.A. (1995). Treatment of
spasticity in spinal cord injury with dronabinol, a tetrahydrocannabinol derivative. American Journal of
Therapeutics, 2, 799–805.
Kosel, B.W., Aweeka, F.T., Benowitz, N.L., et al. (2002). The effects of cannabinoids on the pharmacokinetics of indinavir and nelfinavir. AIDS, 16, 543–550.

®

409

410

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Krishnan, S., Cairns, R., and Howard, R. (2009). Cannabinoids for the treatment of dementia. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2, CD007204.
Kurzthaler, I., Bodner, T., Kemmler, G., et al. (2005). The effect of nabilone on neuropsychological functions related to driving ability: an extended case series. Human Psychopharmacology, 20, 291–293.
Lane, M., Smith, F.E., Sullivan, R.A., and Plasse, T.F. (1990). Dronabinol and prochlorperazine alone and
in combination as antiemetic agents for cancer chemotherapy. America Journal of Clinical Oncology, 13,
480–484.
Layeeque, R., Siegel, E., Kass, R., et al. (2006). Prevention of nausea and vomiting following breast surgery.
American Journal of Surgery, 191, 767–772.
Lemberger, L., McMahon, R.E., Archer, R.A., Matsumoto, K., and Rowe, H. (1973). The in vitro
and in vivo metabolism of delta 6a,10a dimethyl heptyl tetrahydrocannabinol (DMHP). Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 187, 169–175.
Lemberger, L., McMahon, R., Archer, R., Matsumoto, K. and Rowe, H. (1974). Pharmacologic effects and
physiologic disposition of delta 6a,10a dimethyl heptyl tetrahydrocannabinol (DMHP) in man. Clinical
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 15, 380–386.
Lemberger, L. and Rowe, H. (1975). Clinical pharmacology of nabilone, a cannabinol derivative. Clinical
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 18, 720–726.
Levin, F.R. and Kleber, H.D. (2008). Use of dronabinol for cannabis dependence: two case reports and
review. America Journal of Addiction, 17, 161–164.
Levin, F.R., Mariani, J.J., Brooks, D.J., et al. (2011). Dronabinol for the treatment of cannabis dependence:
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 116, 142–150.
Levitt, M. (1982). Nabilone vs. placebo in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in
cancer patients. Cancer Treatment Reviews, 9(Suppl. B), 49–53.
Leweke, F.M., Schneider, U., Radwan, M., Schmidt, E. and Emrich, H.M. (2000). Different effects of
nabilone and cannabidiol on binocular depth inversion in man. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and
Behaviour, 66, 175–181.
Leweke, F.M., Schneider, U., Thies, M., Munte, T.F. and Emrich, H.M. (1999). Effects of synthetic
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on binocular depth inversion of natural and artificial objects in man.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 142, 230–235.
Lewis, I.H., Campbell, D.N., and Barrowcliffe, M.P. (1994). Effect of nabilone on nausea and vomiting
after total abdominal hysterectomy. British Journal of Anaesthesia, 73, 244–246.
Lile, J.A., Kelly, T.H., and Hays, L.R. (2010). Substitution profile of the cannabinoid agonist nabilone in
human subjects discriminating delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Clinical Neuropharmacology, 33, 235–242.
Lorenz, R. (2004). On the application of cannabis in paediatrics and epileptology. Neuroendocrinology
Letters, 25, 40–44.
Maas, A.I., Murray, G., Henney, H., 3rd, et al. (2006). Efficacy and safety of dexanabinol in severe traumatic brain injury: results of a phase III randomised, placebo-controlled, clinical trial. Lancet Neurology,
5, 38–45.
Machado Rocha, F.C., Stefano, S.C., De Cassia Haiek, R., Rosa Oliveira, L.M., and Da Silveira, D.X.
(2008). Therapeutic use of Cannabis sativa on chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting among
cancer patients: systematic review and meta-analysis. European Journal of Cancer Care (England), 17,
431–443.
Mahlberg, R. and Walther, S. (2007). Actigraphy in agitated patients with dementia. Monitoring treatment
outcomes. Zeitschrift für Gerontologie und Geriatrie, 40, 178–184.
Maida, V. (2008). Nabilone for the treatment of paraneoplastic night sweats: a report of four cases. Journal
of Palliative Medicine, 11, 929–934.
Maida, V., Ennis, M., Irani, S., Corbo, M., and Dolzhykov, M. (2008). Adjunctive nabilone in cancer pain
and symptom management: a prospective observational study using propensity scoring. Journal of
Supportive Oncology, 6, 119–124.

Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids Licensed as Medicines

Martyn, C.N., Illis, L.S., and Thom, J. (1995). Nabilone in the treatment of multiple sclerosis. Lancet,
345, 579.
Mattes, R.D., Shaw, L.M., Edling-Owens, J., Engelman, K., and Elsohly, M. A. (1993). Bypassing the
first-pass effect for the therapeutic use of cannabinoids. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behaviour, 44,
745–747.
McGilveray, I.J. (2005). Pharmacokinetics of cannabinoids. Pain Research and Management, 10(Suppl. A),
15A–22A.
Meiri, E., Jhangiani, H., Vredenburgh, J.J., et al. (2007). Efficacy of dronabinol alone and in combination
with ondansetron versus ondansetron alone for delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.
Current Medical Research and Opinion, 23, 533–543.
Mendelson, J.H., Ellingboe, J., and Mello, N.K. (1984). Acute effects of natural and synthetic cannabis compounds on prolactin levels in human males. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behaviour, 20,
103–106.
Mendelson, J.H. and Mello, N.K. (1984). Reinforcing properties of oral delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol,
smoked marijuana, and nabilone: influence of previous marijuana use. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 83,
351–356.
Menetrey, A., Augsburger, M., Favrat, B., et al. (2005). Assessment of driving capability through the use of
clinical and psychomotor tests in relation to blood cannabinoids levels following oral administration of
20 mg dronabinol or of a cannabis decoction made with 20 or 60 mg Delta9-THC. Journal of Analytical
Toxicology, 29, 327–338.
Meyniel, C., Ollivier, Y., Hamidou, M., Pereon, Y., and Derkinderen, P. (2011). Dramatic improvement of
refractory Isaacs’ syndrome after treatment with dronabinol. Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery, 113,
323–324.
Muller-Vahl, K.R. (2003). Cannabinoids reduce symptoms of Tourette’s syndrome. Expert Opinion in
Pharmacotherapy, 4, 1717–1725.
Muller-Vahl, K.R., Schneider, U., and Emrich, H.M. (1999). Nabilone increases choreatic movements in
Huntington’s disease. Movement Disorders, 14, 1038–1040.
Nakano, S., Gillespie, H.K., and Hollister, L.E. (1978). A model for evaluation of antianxiety drugs with
the use of experimentally induced stress: comparison of nabilone and diazepam. Clinical Pharmacology
and Therapeutics, 23, 54–62.
Narang, S., Gibson, D., Wasan, A.D., et al. (2008). Efficacy of dronabinol as an adjuvant treatment for
chronic pain patients on opioid therapy. Journal of Pain, 9, 254–264.
Neff, G.W., O’Brien, C.B., Reddy, K.R., et al. (2002). Preliminary observation with dronabinol in patients
with intractable pruritus secondary to cholestatic liver disease. American Journal of Gastroenterology, 97,
2117–2119.
Neidhart, J.A., Gagen, M.M., Wilson, H.E., and Young, D.C. (1981). Comparative trial of the antiemetic
effects of THC and haloperidol. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 38S–42S.
Newell, F.W., Stark, P., Jay, W.M., and Schanzlin, D.J. (1979). Nabilone: a pressure-reducing synthetic
benzopyran in open-angle glaucoma. Ophthalmology, 86, 156–160.
Niederle, N., Schutte, J., and Schmidt, C.G. (1986). Crossover comparison of the antiemetic efficacy of
nabilone and alizapride in patients with nonseminomatous testicular cancer receiving cisplatin therapy.
Klinische Wochenschrift, 64, 362–365.
Niiranen, A. and Mattson, K. (1985). A cross-over comparison of nabilone and prochlorperazine for emesis induced by cancer chemotherapy. American Journal of Clinical Oncology, 8, 336–340.
Niiranen, A. and Mattson, K. (1987). Antiemetic efficacy of nabilone and dexamethasone: a randomized
study of patients with lung cancer receiving chemotherapy. American Journal of Clinical Oncology, 10,
325–329.
Noyes, R., Jr., Brunk, S.F., Avery, D.A., and Canter, A.C. (1975a). The analgesic properties of delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol and codeine. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 18, 84–89.

411

412

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Noyes, R., Jr., Brunk, S.F., Baram, D.A., and Canter, A. (1975b). Analgesic effect of delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 15, 139–143.
Orr, L.E. and McKernan, J.F. (1981). Antiemetic effect of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in chemotherapyassociated nausea and emesis as compared to placebo and compazine. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology,
21, 76S–80S.
Passmore, M.J. (2008). The cannabinoid receptor agonist nabilone for the treatment of dementia-related
agitation. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 23, 116–117.
Petro, D.J. and Ellenberger, C., Jr. (1981). Treatment of human spasticity with delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 413S–416S.
Pini, L.A., Guerzoni, S., Cainazzo, M.M., et al. (2012). Nabilone for the treatment of medication overuse headache: results of a preliminary double-blind, active-controlled, randomized trial. Journal of
Headache Pain, 13, 677–684.
Pinsger, M., Schimetta, W., Volc, D., et al. (2006). [Benefits of an add-on treatment with the synthetic cannabinomimetic nabilone on patients with chronic pain – a randomized controlled trial]. Wiener klinische Wochenschrift, 118, 327–335.
Plange, N., Arend, K.O., Kaup, M., et al. (2007). Dronabinol and retinal hemodynamics in humans.
American Journal of Ophthalmology, 143, 173–174.
Pomeroy, M., Fennelly, J.J., and Towers, M. (1986). Prospective randomized double-blind trial of
nabilone versus domperidone in the treatment of cytotoxic-induced emesis. Cancer Chemotherapy and
Pharmacology, 17, 285–288.
Pooyania, S., Ethans, K., Szturm, T., Casey, A., and Perry, D. (2010). A randomized, double-blinded,
crossover pilot study assessing the effect of nabilone on spasticity in persons with spinal cord injury.
Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 91, 703–707.
Poster, D.S., Penta, J.S., Bruno, S., and MacDonald, J.S. (1981). delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in clinical
oncology. Journal of the American Medical Association, 245, 2047–2051.
Prasad, B., Radulovacki, M.G., and Carley, D.W. (2013). Proof of concept trial of dronabinol in obstructive sleep apnea. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 4, 1.
Priestman, S.G., Priestman, T.J., and Canney, P.A. (1987). A double-blind randomised cross-over comparison of nabilone and metoclopramide in the control of radiation-induced nausea. Clinical Radiology,
38, 543–5444.
Priestman, T.J. and Priestman, S.G. (1984). An initial evaluation of nabilone in the control of
radiotherapy-­induced nausea and vomiting. Clinical Radiology, 35, 265–266.
Raby, W.N., Modica, P.A., Wolintz, R.J., and Murtaugh, K. (2006). Dronabinol reduces signs and
symptoms of idiopathic intracranial hypertension: a case report. Journal of Ocular Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, 22, 68–75.
Redmond, W.J., Goffaux, P., Potvin, S., and Marchand, S. (2008). Analgesic and antihyperalgesic effects of
nabilone on experimental heat pain. Current Medical Research and Opinion, 24, 1017–1024.
Rintala, D.H., Fiess, R.N., Tan, G., Holmes, S.A., and Bruel, B.M. (2010). Effect of dronabinol on central neuropathic pain after spinal cord injury: a pilot study. American Journal of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, 89, 840–848.
Robbins, M.S., Tarshish, S., Solomon, S., and Grosberg, B.M. (2009). Cluster attacks responsive to recreational cannabis and dronabinol. Headache, 49, 914–916.
Rubin, A., Lemberger, L., Warrick, P., et al. (1977). Physiologic disposition of nabilone, a cannabinol
derivative, in man. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 22, 85–91.
Rudich, Z., Stinson, J., Jeavons, M., and Brown, S.C. (2003). Treatment of chronic intractable neuropathic
pain with dronabinol: case report of two adolescents. Pain Research and Management, 8, 221–224.
Russo, E. and Guy, G.W. (2006). A tale of two cannabinoids: the therapeutic rationale for combining tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol. Medical Hypotheses, 66, 234–246.

Synthetic Psychoactive Cannabinoids Licensed as Medicines

Russo, E.B. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage
effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1344–1364.
Russo, E.B., Merzouki, A., Mesa, J.M., Frey, K.A., and Bach, P.J. (2004). Cannabis improves night vision: a
case study of dark adaptometry and scotopic sensitivity in kif smokers of the Rif mountains of northern
Morocco. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 93, 99–104.
Salerian, A.J. (2004). Successful treatment of sexual dysfunction with dronabinol: a case report. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 1146–1147.
Sallan, S.E., Cronin, C., Zelen, M., and Zinberg, N.E. (1980). Antiemetics in patients receiving chemotherapy for cancer: a randomized comparison of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and prochlorperazine. New
England Journal of Medicine, 302, 135–138.
Sallan, S.E., Zinberg, N.E., and Frei, E., 3rd (1975). Antiemetic effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in
patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. New England Journal of Medicine, 293, 795–797.
Schindler, F., Anghelescu, I., Regen, F., and Jockers-Scherubl, M. (2008). Improvement in refractory
obsessive compulsive disorder with dronabinol. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 536–537.
Schoedel, K.A., Chen, N., Hilliard, A., et al. (2011). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover study to evaluate the subjective abuse potential and cognitive effects of nabiximols oromucosal spray in subjects with a history of recreational cannabis use. Human Psychopharmacology, 26,
224–236.
Schwarcz, G. and Karajgi, B. (2010). Improvement in refractory psychosis with dronabinol: four case
reports. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71, 1552–153.
Schwarcz, G., Karajgi, B., and McCarthy, R. (2009). Synthetic delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (dronabinol) can improve the symptoms of schizophrenia. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 29,
255–258.
Seeling, W., Kneer, L., Buchele, B., et al. (2006). Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol and the opioid receptor agonist
piritramide do not act synergistically in postoperative pain. Anaesthesist, 55, 391–400.
Sieradzan, K.A., Fox, S.H., Hill, M., et al. (2001). Cannabinoids reduce levodopa-induced dyskinesia in
Parkinson’s disease: a pilot study. Neurology, 57, 2108–2111.
Skrabek, R.Q., Galimova, L., Ethans, K., and Perry, D. (2008). Nabilone for the treatment of pain in fibromyalgia. Journal of Pain, 9, 164–173.
Steele, N., Gralla, R.J., Braun, D.W., Jr., and Young, C.W. (1980). Double-blind comparison of the
antiemetic effects of nabilone and prochlorperazine on chemotherapy-induced emesis. Cancer
Treatment Reports, 64, 219–224.
Struwe, M., Kaempfer, S.H., Geiger, C.J., et al. (1993). Effect of dronabinol on nutritional status in HIV
infection. Annals of Pharmacotherapy, 27, 827–831.
Svendsen, K.B., Jensen, T.S., and Bach, F.W. (2004). Does the cannabinoid dronabinol reduce central
pain in multiple sclerosis? Randomised double blind placebo controlled crossover trial. British Medical
Journal, 329, 253.
Tashkin, D.P., Shapiro, B.J., Lee, Y.E., and Harper, C.E. (1975). Effects of smoked marijuana in experimentally induced asthma. American Review of Respiratory Disorders, 112, 377–386.
Tiedeman, J.S., Shields, M.B., Weber, P.A., et al. (1981). Effect of synthetic cannabinoids on elevated
intraocular pressure. Ophthalmology, 88, 270–277.
Timpone, J.G., Wright, D.J., Li, N., et al. (1997). The safety and pharmacokinetics of single-agent and
combination therapy with megestrol acetate and dronabinol for the treatment of HIV wasting syndrome. The DATRI 004 Study Group. Division of AIDS Treatment Research Initiative. AIDS Research
and Human Retroviruses, 13, 305–315.
Toth, C., Mawani, S., Brady, S., et al. (2012). An enriched-enrolment, randomized withdrawal, flexibledose, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel assignment efficacy study of nabilone as adjuvant in the
treatment of diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain. Pain, 153, 2073–2082.

413

414

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Tramer, M.R., Carroll, D., Campbell, F.A., et al. (2001). Cannabinoids for control of chemotherapy
induced nausea and vomiting: quantitative systematic review. British Medical Journal, 323, 16–21.
Ungerleider, J.T., Andrysiak, T., Fairbanks, L., et al. (1982). Cannabis and cancer chemotherapy: a comparison of oral delta-9-THC and prochlorperazine. Cancer, 50, 636–645.
Ungerleider, J.T., Andyrsiak, T., Fairbanks, L., Ellison, G.W., and Myers, L.W. (1987). Delta-9-THC in
the treatment of spasticity associated with multiple sclerosis. Advances in Alcohol and Substance Abuse,
7, 39–50.
Vandrey, R., Stitzer, M.L., Mintzer, M.Z., et al. (2013). The dose effects of short-term dronabinol (oral
THC) maintenance in daily cannabis users. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 128, 64–70.
Wada, J.K., Bogdon, D.L., Gunnell, J.C., et al. (1982). Double-blind, randomized, crossover trial of
nabilone vs. placebo in cancer chemotherapy. Cancer Treatment Reviews, 9 Suppl. B, 39–44.
Walsh, D., Kirkova, J., and Davis, M.P. (2005). The efficacy and tolerability of long-term use of dronabinol
in cancer-related anorexia: a case series. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 30, 493–495.
Walther, S., Mahlberg, R., Eichmann, U., and Kunz, D. (2006). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol for nighttime agitation in severe dementia. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 185, 524–528.
Walther, S., Schupbach, B., Seifritz, E., Homan, P., and Strik, W. (2011). Randomized, controlled
crossover trial of dronabinol, 2.5 mg, for agitation in 2 patients with dementia. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 31, 256–258.
Ware, M.A., Adams, H., and Guy, G.W. (2005). The medicinal use of cannabis in the UK: results of a
nationwide survey. International Journal of Clinical Practice, 59, 291–295.
Ware, M.A., Fitzcharles, M.A., Joseph, L., and Shir, Y. (2010). The effects of nabilone on sleep in fibromyalgia: results of a randomized controlled trial. Anesthesia and Analgesia, 110, 604–610.
Ware, M.A. and St Arnaud-Trempe, E. (2010). The abuse potential of the synthetic cannabinoid nabilone.
Addiction, 105, 494–503.
Wesnes, K.A., Annas, P., Edgar, C.J., et al. (2010). Nabilone produces marked impairments to cognitive function and changes in subjective state in healthy volunteers. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 24,
1659–1669.
Williams, S.J., Hartley, J.P., and Graham, J.D. (1976). Bronchodilator effect of delta1-­
tetrahydrocannabinol administered by aerosol of asthmatic patients. Thorax, 31, 720–723.
Wilson, M.M., Philpot, C., and Morley, J.E. (2007). Anorexia of aging in long term care: is dronabinol an
effective appetite stimulant? – a pilot study. Journal of Nutrition, Health and Aging, 11, 195–198.
Wissel, J., Haydn, T., Muller, J., et al. (2006). Low dose treatment with the synthetic cannabinoid Nabilone
significantly reduces spasticity-related pain: a double-blind placebo-controlled cross-over trial. Journal
of Neurology, 253, 1337–1341.
Wong, B.S., Camilleri, M., Busciglio, I., et al. (2011). Pharmacogenetic trial of a cannabinoid agonist
shows reduced fasting colonic motility in patients with nonconstipated irritable bowel syndrome.
Gastroenterology, 141, 1638–1647 e1–7.
Wong, B.S., Camilleri, M., Eckert, D., et al. (2012). Randomized pharmacodynamic and pharmacogenetic
trial of dronabinol effects on colon transit in irritable bowel syndrome-diarrhea. Neurogastroenterology
and Motility, 24, 358–e169.
Zutt, M., Hanssle, H., Emmert, S., Neumann, C., and Kretschmer, L. (2006). [Dronabinol for supportive
therapy in patients with malignant melanoma and liver metastases]. Der Hautarzt, 57, 423–427.

Chapter 22

Cannabinoids in Clinical Practice:
A UK Perspective
William Notcutt and Emily L. Clarke

22.1 Introduction
Mechoulam’s discovery of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) was the starting point in the late
1960s of basic science research into cannabinoids. This led to the exploration of their therapeutic potential and finally 30 years later, to modern scientific investigation into their clinical use.
However, unlike most other medicines, the journey has been difficult and complex, principally
due to the association with the recreational use of the drug and the inevitable opprobrium from
politicians and the media.
Opiates did not encounter this problem since they became well established in medical practice
prior to both the modern era of medicine evaluation and the concerns over the potential for
dependency. Consider the difficulty of introducing morphine these days, an analgesic with a narrow therapeutic range and major side effects (sedation, respiratory depression, addiction, nausea,
vomiting, constipation, etc.). Would morphine ever get past a Phase 1 trial? Many patients find
their pain easier to tolerate than the side effects of this opiate and yet morphine remains a cornerstone of analgesic therapy.
Research into the basic science of cannabinoids has informed the growing interest in the clinical potential, but movement from the laboratory to the bedside has been a long, slow process for
a number of reasons:
1 There has been a lack of appropriate medicinal-grade materials.
2 The delivery systems have needed to be developed beyond the established methods used recreationally.
3 There is little widespread, accurate, basic knowledge of cannabinoid therapy amongst medical
practitioners.
4 There is still a widespread societal concern regarding cannabis amongst patients, the media,
and politicians, which is both the cause and consequence of the Schedule 1 status for cannabis and the Schedule 2 status for cannabinoid medicines (from 2010). It is notable that both
nabilone and Sativex® (nabiximols) were originally prescribed as Schedule 4 medicines until
2010 in the UK, and then Sativex® was returned to Schedule 2 in 2013!
5 The variable legal and regulatory frameworks in different nations make the widespread international introduction of medicinal cannabinoids very difficult. Similar problems continue to
affect the use of medicinal opiates.

6 Currently the cost of recently developed medicinal cannabinoids is high, primarily due to the
cost of research and development and low usage. Illicit cannabis is generally much cheaper,
leading to the bizarre situation of it being less expensive to commit a criminal act and purchase one’s medicine on the “street.”

416

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Meek (1994) stated that 75% of doctors wished to be able to prescribe medicinal cannabinoids, but
until recently very few physicians have been able to do so. Furthermore, many doctors have found
themselves in the situation of having to discuss with their patient the use of “street” cannabis as a
medicine, and potentially having to give advice on various aspects of its use alongside other pharmaceutical agents. There is not only a lack of accurate and basic knowledge of cannabinoids and
their therapeutic use, but also a large amount of unscientific ignorance and mythology surrounding cannabis. Regretfully many patients and doctors find the idea of discussing the use of an illicit
substance as a medicine very difficult and uncomfortable, particularly as possession of cannabis
still remains a criminal act as defined by its Class B status in the UK. In addition, the majority of
the general public believe that the potential side effects of medicinal cannabinoids are very similar
to those associated with recreational materials.
As cannabinoid therapy starts to be incorporated into medical practice there is a need for
dissemination of the current clinical knowledge, both the effectiveness data and the real-life
experience, to the wider medical and lay worlds. This chapter aims to fulfil that contemporary
need through a discussion of the management of patients undergoing cannabinoid therapy which
is based on current peer-reviewed evidence and on the growing clinical experiences of one of
the authors, Willy Notcutt (WN), and other cannabinoid prescribers in the UK and elsewhere
(Grotenhermen and Müller-Vahl 2012).

22.2 Medicinally available cannabinoids and their administration
The delivery method of cannabinoid medicines has presented a challenge. Most patients who
want to take a medicine for pain or similar symptoms wish to be made more comfortable so that
they can participate in activities of daily living (ADLs). It is of no great benefit to exchange a state
of immobility because of pain, spasticity, or nausea for one caused by excessive plasma levels of
cannabinoid. Controlling the intake of cannabinoid into the body presents problems. Currently
the only two routes formally accepted by regulators in the UK are oral and oromucosal (sublingual
and buccal). However, we will comment on the other established routes of delivery of cannabis
that may be used by patients presenting to the doctor.
22.2.1 Smoking

Whilst smoking cannabis has been the traditional method of administering the drug recreationally, this is not an acceptable method of use as a medicine to most patients, to doctors, to regulators, or to the law. Undoubtedly some patients can inhale smoke or vapor accurately and control
their intake without overloading (Grotenhermen 2003). In many respects this mimics a patientcontrolled analgesia device (inhale a small quantity, wait a short time, and assess the benefit before
deciding on a further intake of the drug). However, unless one is an experienced smoker, high
plasma levels of THC can easily be generated, risking the onset of psychoactive effects. In general,
the experienced cannabis smokers are those who are frequent recreational users. The other drawbacks of smoking are the harm from potentially carcinogenic combustion products (Hall 1998;
Henry et al. 2003), the inconvenience of use, particularly in public, and social unacceptability due
to association with recreational use.
22.2.2 Vaporizing

Vaporizing the drug into a gas by the controlled electrical heating of plant material avoids burning and the production of smoke. However, the same problems arise: the potential for high initial

Cannabinoids in Clinical Practice: A UK Perspective

plasma levels, the risk from the inhalation of hot gas, and the significant inconvenience of administration. Again, as with smoking, it can be used with a reasonable level of patient control of the
intake.
Unfortunately, unlike water-soluble medicines, cannabinoids cannot easily be nebulized into
the small droplet size suitable to penetrate the lower airways; larger droplets irritate the respiratory tract and induce coughing.
22.2.3 Oral

The oral route is regarded as the most appropriate form of analgesic drug delivery for opioids with
a predictable onset in 20–30 min for an immediate-release preparation. Two licensed cannabinoidbased medications employ this route of administration. Nabilone (Cesamet®) is a synthetic THC
analogue developed in 1984 and is licensed in the UK for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV). It is given orally in capsule form. Dronabinol (Marinol®), a synthetic form of THC,
is licensed in the US (but unavailable in the UK) for CINV and anorexia.
Unfortunately, oral cannabinoids have a slow, variable absorption and 80% of ingested THC
converts to the possibly more psychoactive 11-hydroxy-THC during first-pass metabolism (Russo
and Guy 2006). Consequently, it is difficult to titrate to an individual optimum dose, thereby
increasing the risk of the common side effects. In the UK, titration is made more difficult because
of the lack of a range of capsule strengths for nabilone (1 mg only), whereas in the US, dronabinol
is supplied in 2.5, 5, and 10 mg strengths.
In Europe outside the UK, cannabis plant material in a standardized strength and in an uncontaminated and defined form is available as a pharmaceutical product and delivered via a vaporizer
or made into a tea (e.g., Bedrocan®, Netherlands). However, the patient then has the problem
of finding the most convenient and predictable method of administration. Finally, Cannador®,
a German preparation comprised of an oral capsule-containing plant extract, has been used in
some clinical trials (Holdcroft et al. 2006; Zajicek et al. 2003). However, it is not available for clinical use in the UK.
22.2.4 Sublingual/oromucosal

In order to avoid some of the problems of the oral route, the oromucosal method of administration was developed. Sativex® is a sublingual spray combining THC with cannabidiol (CBD), and
was licensed in 2010 in the UK for spasticity and spasms in multiple sclerosis (MS). This route of
administration enables efficient and accurate delivery of active agent. The sublingual administration combining THC and CBD as primary ingredients has improved the ability of the patient to
control dosing and has a reasonably fast speed of onset whilst probably lowering the side effect
potential (Lynch 2011; Pertwee 2004). Also, through the addition of CBD, Sativex® possesses
analgesic, antispasmodic, anticonvulsant, anxiolytic, and anti-inflammatory properties, as well
as being neuroprotective and antipsychotic (Jiang et al. 2005; Roser and Haussleiter 2012) most
of which may be valuable in the management of pain. Recently, Robson (2011) reported that
Sativex® achieved far fewer reported psychotropic effects (2.2%) than nabilone.
Clinical research into cannabinoid therapy is still in its infancy and the most appropriate routes
of administration of these agents are still to be determined. It may be that different preparations
will be needed for different uses in order to strike a balance between the benefits and drawbacks, as with opioids. It has been suggested that a background oral dose may be used alongside
a more rapidly acting and patient-controlled sublingual or vaporized dose to help maintain
symptomatic control for acute changes in symptoms (Grotenhermen 2001). Within the clinical

417

418

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

setting it is essential to customize the prescription of cannabinoids on a patient-by-patient basis,
which may involve multiple agents, preparations, or timings rather than following a rigid dose
regimen. This parallels the way in which an opioid would be used in managing chronic pain. As
yet there are no cannabinoid preparations available that are delivered rectally, transdermally, or
parenterally, but these are future possibilities.
22.2.5 Illicit sources of plant material

Many patients are desperate enough to use illicit supplies of cannabis as a medicine, smoked or
orally ingested. The physician needs to be aware of this when managing such a patient as they
may also be using other prescribed medication. Understanding the speed of onset of effect,
the endpoint of titration that the patient uses, the pattern of use, and the duration of action is
important and can usually be obtained from careful history taking. It is almost impossible to do
anything more than guess the strength or composition of the illicit material, although assessing
the reported effects and side effects may be a guide.

22.3 Cannabinoids and clinical use
Cannabis has been used therapeutically for some 5000 years and like many other plant-based
medicines (opiates, salicylic acid, digoxin, senna, hyoscine, taxol, curare, quinine, chilli, etc.), its
use has been explored for a wide range of ailments. Many of the uses being evaluated today with
modern research techniques have appeared in observational studies dating back to the late 1800s.
Clinicians experimented with cannabis in a variety of different situations, largely intractable to
the medical practice of those days. Had cannabis not been perceived to be addictive (principally
because of the commercial corruption and the Reefer Madness campaigns in the US in the 1930s)
it is likely that it would have become well established in clinical practice. As we have subsequently
learnt, cannabis is equivalent to benzodiazepines and most other commonly used psychoactive
drugs in the harm potential for the individual (Nutt et al. 2010).
Whereas opiates and benzodiazepines have narrowly defined uses (nociceptive pain and anxiolysis respectively), the physiological action and the clinical potential of cannabinoids appears
much broader. This reflects the ubiquitous nature of the endocannabinoid system. Sometimes
one can almost hear the marketing hype of the nineteenth-century snake oil salesman selling his
wares, when one hears a patient describing the benefit gained. Yet all those symptomatic improvements were described by one, very sensible, woman with MS (Box 22.1).
Currently, the major clinical trials of medicinal-grade cannabinoids have been directed towards
developing licenses for clinical use, which now include CINV, spasticity and spasms in multiple
sclerosis (MS), neuropathic and cancer pain, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)related anorexia. Furthermore, the use is only advocated when symptoms remain refractory to all
other agents.
Now that the safety of medicinal-grade cannabinoids has been demonstrated, other uses are
emerging. There is still a wide range of chronic clinical problems with distressing and intractable

Box 22.1 A patient of the author WN describes her benefit
The fatigue goes. The migraine attacks are reduced; sleep is better. The spasms and cramps are
cured, night-time visits to the toilet are less; balance is improved. The strange sensations in the
legs are improved; I am able to move and dress more easily.

Cannabinoids in Clinical Practice: A UK Perspective

symptoms that modern medicine is unable to relieve. Therefore clinicians are sometimes resorting to prescribing “off label” in order to respond to patient need.
22.3.1 Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting

and appetite stimulation

In 1984, CINV became the first indication for the use of nabilone (Cesamet®) in the UK through
exploitation of THC’s antiemetic properties. More recently, dronabinol (Marinol®), synthetic
THC, was licensed for the same purpose in the US, but it remains unavailable in the UK. Despite
nabilone being superseded by 5-HT3 antagonists for CINV in the UK, Meiri et al. (2007) concluded that the antinausea properties of dronabinol (71%) had similar efficacy to ondansetron
(64%) and both drugs were well tolerated.
Appetite stimulation by THC when used recreationally is a well-known side effect and so the
possibility of use to treat anorexia has been suggested, especially in AIDS. Haney et al. (2007) concluded that both oral dronabinol and smoking cannabis caused an increase in caloric intake and
weight in patients taking antiretroviral therapy. The benefit of cannabinoids to patients with AIDS
may extend much further than merely appetite stimulation as several studies have shown that cannabinoid therapy also reduces HIV-associated pain (Abrams et al. 2007; Ellis et al. 2009), nausea
(Flynn and Hanif 1992) and vomiting, whilst increasing adherence to antiretroviral therapy (de
Jong et al. 2005).
22.3.2 Spasticity and spasms

In the UK, patients with MS championed the use of cannabis as a medicine in the 1990s. The
advent of a purified extract (Sativex®) allowing precise titration of intake allowed the development of a series of placebo-controlled randomized controlled trials with ongoing observational
extension studies and other associated investigations. The trials were difficult and complex due to
the heterogeneous nature of the symptomatology of MS and the variety of responses that patients
may experience. The symptoms known to be improved by the drug include spasticity, spasms,
neuropathic pain, and bladder dysfunction, whilst also sometimes helping with fatigue, sleep
disturbance, and dysesthesia (Brady et al. 2004; Collin et al. 2010; Novotna et al. 2011; Rog et al.
2005; Vermersch 2011; Wade et al. 2010) (Box 22.1). Consequently, the new combination cannabinoid therapy, Sativex® was eventually licensed in 2010 in the UK for spasticity and spasms in
sufferers of MS.
The Cannabis in Multiple Sclerosis (CAMS) randomized controlled trial by Zajicek et al.
(2003), assessed patient spasticity with a cannabis extract, THC, and placebo. They concluded
that while there was no improvement to be found when assessing spasticity on the Ashworth scale,
cannabinoids did improve some subjective secondary outcomes. In 2012, however, the Multiple
Sclerosis and Extract of Cannabis (MUSEC) trial (Zajicek et al. 2012) concluded that the rate
of relief of muscle stiffness in MS patients after 12 weeks of therapy was doubled with cannabis
extract compared to placebo.
22.3.3 Long-term use in spasticity and spasms

Following on from many of the Sativex® studies, patients have had the option to enter extension
studies to evaluate long-term effects. This has all been open-label primarily assessing the maintenance of benefit alongside the possible emergence of side effects (Serpell et al. 2013).
Additionally, Notcutt et al. (2012a) evaluated the ability of Sativex® to provide long-term relief
from spasticity by assessing the impact of sudden medicine withdrawal after its use for at least

419

420

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

12 weeks, demonstrating the ongoing benefit patients were receiving. An observational study
(Notcutt 2012b) reviewed the benefits that patients continued to get with long-term use: spasticity, pain, sleep, ADLs. This study also showed the improvements that the patient’s carers were
experiencing.
Despite many patients stating that cannabis has altered their disease progression and not just
merely their symptoms, no human trials have so far proved this. However, data from animal trials
have suggested some disease-modifying activity and so in time cannabinoids may prove useful in
this respect.
22.3.4 Neuropathic pain

Neuropathic pain, pain secondary to nerve damage, is a further indication for the use of Sativex®
in Canada. It is a type of pain that is commonly difficult to treat and is least satisfied by available
analgesics. A systematic review by Lynch and Campbell (2011) and a case series by Notcutt et al.
(2004) found that cannabinoids were an efficacious treatment option. There is also evidence to
suggest that long-term use does not diminish the effects (Nurmikko et al. 2007).
22.3.5 Emerging uses

The history of cannabis use has thrown up evidence of the ability of cannabis to treat a wide range
of intractable problems and this is supported by knowledge emerging from basic science.
Use as an analgesic agent is an emerging indication for cannabinoids that has been reviewed by
Campbell et al. (2001) and Lynch and Campbell (2011). Early studies showed that THC has similar analgesic efficacy to codeine in short-term use in acute pain (Campbell et al. 2001). However,
Cichewicz et al. (1999) and Karst et al. (2010) stated that cannabinoids employ a different mechanism of action to opiates and therefore could augment an opiate effect and be a good possibility
as an adjuvant choice for those with intractable pain. This would be similar to the way tricyclic
antidepressants are used in chronic pain management.
Cannabinoids may also be of great use in patients who suffer sleep disturbance as a consequence of chronic pain since cannabinoids have been shown to aid sleep (Vermersch 2011).
Furthermore, it is well documented that opiates and tricyclic antidepressants may disrupt sleep
architecture which can exacerbate perceived pain.
Postoperative pain may also be an area that could benefit from cannabinoid therapy since opiates are known to cause nausea, vomiting, respiratory depression, and basal atelectasis, which
may delay wound healing and cause patient distress. Cannabinoids, by contrast, are antiemetic
and therefore would both augment the analgesic effect of the opiate, whilst ameliorating the nauseating effects. Although this may theoretically seem like a winning formula, Seeling et al. (2006)
found no improvement when using opiate and cannabinoid combination therapy for postoperative prostatectomy patients as compared to opiates alone. However, this was an unusual model for
studying postoperative pain.
Fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome are two diseases that are not well understood and
have very limited treatment options. One theory regarding the pathophysiology of these diseases
is a disruption of sleep—again this may be helped with cannabinoid therapy as nabilone has been
used for sleep disturbance with some success (Ware et al. 2010). However, Skrabek et al. (2008)
and Russo (2004) suggest that the etiology of fibromyalgia may also be based on an endocannabinoid deficiency syndrome, thereby benefitting from therapy with exogenous cannabinoids.
Psychotic disorders may also be aided by using cannabidiol. Unlike all other emerging uses,
different cannabinoids have different effects on psychotic disorders. THC worsens the state of

Cannabinoids in Clinical Practice: A UK Perspective

schizophrenic patients (D’Souza et al. 2005), but cannabidiol is antipsychotic (Leweke et al. 2007)
and therefore may be of use in this field.
There has also been some investigation into the effect of Sativex® on rheumatoid arthritis, with
promising indications of significant analgesic effects and suppressed disease activity (Blake et al.
2006; Dunn et al. 2012).
In addition, diarrheal disease such as irritable bowel syndrome may be attenuated through use
of THC; Esfandyari et al. (2006, 2007) have demonstrated that this cannabinoid relaxes the colon
and reduces postprandial colonic motility.
Cannabis has been used since the nineteenth century for the treatment of epilepsy and is currently licensed for this purpose in 14 US states (Hoffman and Weber 2010). It has been theorized
that cannabidiol may be responsible as it has been found to have anticonvulsant effects (Jones
et al. 2010). However, a recent Cochrane review (Gloss and Vickrey 2012) on this topic did not
draw any reliable conclusions due to lack of evidence. It is possible that cannabidiol could be
explored for use against treatment-resistant epilepsy.
As with most other up-and-coming fields of research, anecdotal evidence usually precedes any
formal studies. There are many other hypothesized usages of cannabinoids but few have been
investigated formally. A small example of these other potential uses for cannabinoids includes
treatment of: Crohn’s disease (Naftaeli et al. 2011), posttraumatic stress disorder (Ganon-Elazar
and Akirav et al. 2009), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Scotter et al. 2010), cancer pain (Portenoy
et al. 2010), acute brain injury, and adjunctive use in palliative care (Grotenhermen et al. 2012),
with further studies into cancer pain already underway (GW Pharmaceuticals).
It is clear that cannabinoids may be effective at treating a wide range of different disorders and
intractable symptoms unmanaged by established treatment options.

22.4 Side effects and contraindications
22.4.1 General points

Most drugs that cross the blood–brain barrier have a range of adverse effects, with some medicines presenting more of a problem than others. Fortunately, cannabinoids seem to be remarkably
benign in terms of their side effects and there seem to be very few contraindications. However,
many patients may already be using other drugs that act on the central nervous system (CNS),
thereby potentially increasing the risk of side effects.
It is important to realize that care should be taken in the elderly and the frail. Also, since there
has been no significant research into the effect of cannabinoids in children (<18 years old), or
in pregnant or lactating women, the use in these patient groups is not advocated unless benefits
outweigh the risks.
Patient and doctors are commonly concerned about the side effects and contraindications
of cannabinoids. Therefore these are presented here in the form of frequently asked questions
(FAQs) based on questions often asked.
22.4.2 FAQs

Are there specific physical contraindications to using medicinal cannabinoids?
Long-term clinical trials have not identified any absolute contraindications as a result of
any organic disease. However, it would be wise to exercise caution in use in severe cardiovascular, liver, kidney, and immunological disease, especially in acute illness. Conversely,
if a prescribed cannabinoid is controlling severe pain or spasticity etc., then stopping it

421

422

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

suddenly may cause the patient to be plunged into a severe exacerbation of their symptoms,
adding to the burden of their other medical problems.
No problems have been experienced by WN in managing patients who use medicinal cannabinoids, through some acute illnesses and anesthesia. Naturally, in time some problems may
eventually be observed.

What are the common side effects of cannabinoids?
Dizziness, drowsiness, and fatigue are common side effects of using cannabinoids and they may
be due to poor titration. Gastrointestinal effects of diarrhea, nausea, and dry mouth sometimes
occur. More specifically, Sativex® can cause hypersalivation, unpleasant taste, and a stinging sensation as it is delivered sublingually (oromucosally). Hypotonia is also an important side effect
that should be highlighted to MS patients.
Although nabilone is licensed in the US for anorexia associated with AIDS, there is no indication that it causes weight gain in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) negative patients
(Strasser et al. 2006). Similarly, the evidence from the Sativex® studies suggests that weight gain is
not a significant side effect.

Can you become addicted to a cannabis medicine?
At therapeutic levels it has been shown that the abuse potential of the clinical cannabinoids is
very low (Calhoun et al. 1998; Nutt et al. 2010; Schoedel et al. 2011; Ware and St Arnaud-Trempe
2010). The addiction potential of cannabinoids is also low and there is no significant withdrawal
syndrome from medicinal use (Nutt et al. 2010). No evidence of tolerance to the effects of Sativex®
with subsequent increased dose requirements has emerged in clinical trials to date (Robson 2011;
Wade 2012).

Is previous recreational cannabis usage a contraindication?
Cannabis use is widespread. If the patient has a significant history of recreational cannabis use
then the author WN will not prescribe cannabinoids. This is principally due to lack of data on
prescribing in this group of patients who may continue to access illicit sources. This may render
the medicinal cannabinoids less effective, since patients may look to find an endpoint of therapy
in the range of the levels needed for recreational effects. Therefore the risk of misuse of a medicinal cannabinoid may be greater in this group and so this represents a strong contraindication
currently.
Many patients with MS have tried using illicit cannabis, especially those with severe symptoms.
Other patients have used it for a range of chronic pain problems reflecting the failure of modern
medicines to provide adequate relief. Therefore if the illicit source is not suitable or is unavailable
to them, then WN will consider them for a trial of treatment if they have previously obtained
benefit.

Is euphoria or a “high” possible?
Euphoria is a common side effect of smoked cannabis due to high plasma levels rapidly generated
by inhaling it as a vapor. Oral and oromucosal cannabinoids have a much slower onset time and
plasma levels are much lower. Therefore the likelihood of a euphoric effect is also low when using
these routes (Wade 2012). However, the nature of the cannabinoid used is also important and one
may be more likely to see psychoactive effects when cannabidiol is not a constituent. Incautious
titration may lead to a relative overload for an individual, thereby generating euphoric, dysphoric,
or intoxicating effects.

Cannabinoids in Clinical Practice: A UK Perspective

What about psychosis or paranoia?
Whilst it is widely accepted that there is a modest increase in the risk of psychosis associated with
the regular recreational user of cannabis (Degenhardt and Hall 2002; Henquet et al. 2005), this
has not been demonstrated to be a problem for users of the medicinal preparations (Aragona
et al. 2009). The likely important factors in this differentiation are the combination of much lower
dosages, slower titration, and the presence of cannabidiol, alongside the different usage aims,
patient age range (non-child or adolescent), and personality profiles. Even so, it is still advised that
medicinal cannabinoids should be avoided in patients with significant psychiatric disorders (e.g.,
psychosis, substance misuse disorders, personality disorders) until further data becomes available.
However, it should be remembered that patients with MS can develop psychotic symptoms that
are unrelated to their cannabinoid therapy. Psychosis is not only a well-documented feature of the
disease, but is also a consequence of a urinary sepsis secondary to long-term catheter use.

What about less severe mental health problems?
Anxiety and depression are very commonly associated with chronic pain and other neurological disorders. The effective treatment of the underlying symptoms with cannabinoids may significantly improve their mental health. Panic and anxiety are side effects following overdose of
cannabinoids and are therefore preventable with correct titration. These side effects are common
features of uncontrolled recreational use.

Is memory affected?
Cognitive decline and amnesia are possible side effects of cannabinoids especially for the highdose, long-term recreational user. Johns (2001) stated that acute recreational cannabis use may
cause confusion and chronic use has been associated with amotivation syndrome. There is no
evidence that this is a feature of medicinal cannabinoid use. It is not uncommon for patients with
chronic pain to complain of an impaired memory, but this probably reflects the dominating and
distracting effects of such symptoms on mental processes.

Can you become allergic to cannabinoids? Are there any drug interactions?
Allergy to cannabinoid medicines is very rare. Moreover Liu et al. (2010) has demonstrated that
CBD attenuates hypersensitivity.
No evidence of significant drug interactions has emerged in the studies on medicinal cannabinoids. However, the potential for additive sedative effects when used alongside other CNS depressants is always a possibility, particularly in the frail.

Can you drive when using medicinal cannabinoids?
Different countries will have different attitudes and laws concerning driving and the use of cannabis (whether used recreationally or medicinally). Most will have yet to produce appropriate advice
to patients. In the UK, it is for patients to determine their own fitness to drive and it may be the disease itself or the therapy or other medication that hinders this. Most patients manage this decision
satisfactorily. Therefore the rest of this section refers to advice given to UK drivers (by author WN).
From studies of smoked cannabis in volunteers in driving simulators it has been shown (UK
Transport Research Lab 2000) that the main effects of cannabis on driving are that:
◆

the ability to steer and maneuver may be mildly impaired

◆

reaction times to sudden events may be increased

◆

the car is driven at a slower speed as the driver is aware of impairment, which may offset any
slowing of reaction times.

423

424

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

A good example to give to patients is for them to consider their ability to stop if a child were to run
out into the street in front of them. Are they confident in their ability to stop?
Whilst it is reasonable to recognize that acute recreational cannabis consumption may
increase the risk of a collision resulting in serious injury or death (Asbridge et al. 2012; Sexton
et al. 2000), the likelihood of problems occurring with driving whilst using therapeutic doses
is probably low. The intoxication levels in studies of therapeutic Sativex® show that these are
little different from placebo (Wade 2012). However, it also seems likely that any impairment
is probably well within the range of (or lower than) what is currently produced by other pharmaceutical agents which are commonly used for similar conditions (including opiates, benzodiazepines, tricyclic antidepressants, baclofen, etc.). WN cautions patients on driving not only
within 4 h of cannabinoid ingestion but also if their symptoms are uncontrolled (e.g., pain,
spasticity, spasms etc.).
As yet there is no roadside test of cannabis use, but unlike alcohol, any measure of the presence
of cannabis within the body is not an indication that it is having a psychomotor effect. At present
there is no specific information on the effect of the use of medicinal cannabis on the insurance
status of the driver.

Will I put on weight?
Whilst recreational cannabis use may lead to an increased appetite, no significant problems with
weight gain in clinical trials have been seen (Strasser et al. 2006).

Are cannabinoids dangerous if overdosed?
Overdose is likely to cause dizziness, drowsiness, and hypotonia. It is reassuring that in over 5,000
years there have been no recorded deaths directly due to cannabis use, even at recreational doses.
It is estimated from rat studies that the lethal dose of cannabis is the equivalent of 30,000 cigarettes
(Yassa et al. 2010), all smoked at the same time.
In conclusion, the side effect profile of medicinal cannabinoids is well within the spectrum of
problems seen with other psychoactive medicines used in neurology, psychiatry and pain management.

22.5 Prescribing medicinal cannabinoids
22.5.1 General points

Cannabinoids are new medicines to doctors and patients alike and careful instruction in their use
is essential.
The most important principle in administering cannabinoids is gradual dose titration to ensure
optimum benefit with minimum side effects. It is impossible to predict the dose at which benefit
or side effects will start to emerge for an individual patient and this is particularly important when
other psychoactive medicines are already being used. The commonest side effects that determine
dosage are drowsiness and dizziness although sometimes these will lessen over time allowing for
further small dose increases.
A further valuable principle is to start dosing at nighttime, unless the patient is only symptomatic during the day. Many patients, particularly those with spasticity or pain problems, do not
sleep well. Therefore the benefit to spasticity and pain may be supplemented by drowsiness at
night leading to improved sleep with less fatigue and drowsiness during the day.

Cannabinoids in Clinical Practice: A UK Perspective

It is important to advise patients on the safe storage of their medicine in a similar way to opioids, especially if there are young people in the house. It is also wise for patients not to broadcast
their use of medicinal cannabinoids too widely to avoid becoming a target for thieves.
22.5.2 Nabilone

The manufacturers of nabilone recommend a dosing of 1 or 2 mg twice a day 1–3 h before initiation of chemotherapy to try and prevent CINV. Nabilone can be given for the entire course of each
chemotherapy cycle, if required. However, the side effects have limited its use and consequently it
is rarely used in oncology since the introduction of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists.
The awareness of the potential benefits of cannabinoids has led some clinicians from the early
1990s to explore its use, particularly for pain and spasticity. From experience, the usual starting
dose has been 1 mg, the only capsule strength. However, this is often poorly tolerated due to dizziness and dysphoria, with perhaps half the patients who get benefit deciding that the side effects
are not sufficiently tolerable to continue treatment (Notcutt et al. 1997).
As experience regarding the use of nabilone has grown, an approach to patient management
has emerged. The use of nabilone initially only at night normally avoids the problem of drowsiness and dysphoria, with clinical benefit lasting into the day. Some patients, who obtain benefit
but seem very sensitive to developing side effects, cut open the capsule and split the powder into
quarters in order to be able to take a lower dose. From a pharmaceutical point of view, this practical solution is unsatisfactory and a 0.25 mg capsule would make slow and flexible titration much
more accurate and acceptable.
22.5.3 Dronabinol

Dronabinol is not available in the UK. The principles of administration are similar to nabilone
with the benefit of a range of capsule strengths (2.5, 5, 10 mg capsules) making titration easier
along with the ability to customize the dose more flexibly across the 24 h period.
22.5.4 Sativex® (nabiximols)

The oromucosal route was developed to provide a simple alternative to oral administration which
would avoid the irregularities of absorption and the “first-pass” effect of the liver, thereby enabling
more convenient and accurate titration. Principally the sublingual area is recommended but some
patients find this area too sensitive for the alcohol in Sativex® spray. Therefore, the buccal mucosa
on the inside of the cheek is suggested as a suitable alternative. As Sativex® may stimulate salivation it is advised not to apply more than one or two sprays at a time and ideally the spray should
be held in the mouth for at least 5 min or more to enable adequate absorption before swallowing
or having a drink. A period of 15 min should elapse between sprays and a maximum of 12 sprays
per day is advised as the limit.
To guide the initial titration of Sativex®, a simple scheme has been developed (Table 22.1). Some
may consider this too slow but it has emerged as optimal to establish benefit, whilst minimizing
side effects, especially if the patient is being managed as an outpatient. A faster titration is feasible
if the patient is in a hospital under close supervision.
Occasionally patients find the taste of Sativex® too unpleasant and even nauseating. In these
instances, swallowing it with milk or food may be a suitable compromise, although the onset of
effect may be slower and a retitration is necessary.

425

426

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Table 22.1 A schedule for starting Sativex® dosing. Initially the night and then the morning are targeted. However, this can be adjusted to include dosing at other times to customize according to the
timing and severity of the symptoms being treated. Overall the total daily dose should not increase
by more than one spray/day
Day

Morning

Evening

Total/day

1

0

1

1

2

0

1

1

3

0

2

2

4

0

2

2

5

1

2

3

6

1

3

4

7

1

4

5

8

2

4

6

9

2

5

7

10

3

5

8

11

3

6

9

12

4

6

10

13

4

7

11

14

5

7

12

22.5.5 Comparative doses

There have been no “head-to-head” studies comparing the effectiveness or dosing of the available
medicinal cannabinoids. From clinical experience, 2 mg of nabilone seems to be approximately
equivalent to eight sprays of Sativex®. In comparing Sativex® and dronabinol at equal THC levels
the side effect profile is better with Sativex®, probably due to the presence of cannabidiol (Johnson
et al. 2010). How different the therapeutic effects are from symptom to symptom may vary and
also depend on the disease process.
From clinical experience (WN), it is recommended that careful titration should be undertaken
when switching from one cannabinoid to another, especially if the patient is moving from illicit
plant material to the medicinal.
22.5.6 Breakthrough pain, spasms

Some patients may have significant fluctuations in their symptoms, and as with slow release opiate therapy, a breakthrough dose may be required. The oral preparations are slow in onset, and
nabilone is particularly difficult to use in this way because of the lack of a range of doses. Sativex®
has a faster onset and is therefore more flexible. It should not be assumed that the breakthrough
pain from an unrelated disease process should be treated in this way.
22.5.7 Overdose/overload

Whilst patients need to realize the importance of careful titration, significant side effects may
occur. Therefore they should be informed that if dizziness, drowsiness, dysphoria, or hypotonia

Cannabinoids in Clinical Practice: A UK Perspective

are a problem then lying down and resting is the best immediate treatment and symptoms will
almost always resolve in 2–3 h. A subsequent dose reduction of about 25% is advised and physician guidance may need to be sought.
22.5.8 Assessing outcomes

For most patients starting to use cannabinoids for the symptoms of a chronic disease, an
assessment of outcomes should occur between 2 and 4 weeks (Wade 2012). By this time a
clear indication as to whether the patient is benefitting from this therapy can normally be
established. For those who benefit, further “fine tuning” may be necessary to determine the
optimum pattern in terms of dosing and timing across a 24 h period. For Sativex ®, this may
include increasing the number of uses of the spray at other times of day to establish a suitable
maintenance regimen.
Those who fail to get any benefit should discontinue and no withdrawal phenomena would
be expected. Sometimes a patient discovers after discontinuation that they were indeed getting
benefits and these may be different to the original therapeutic targets. A retrial of therapy may
therefore be justified with adjusted parameters.
Currently cannabinoids are (1) expensive and (2) still controversial (especially to non-clinicians),
and therefore formal assessment of benefits is very important. Unfortunately doctors are notorious
for undertaking only minimal symptom assessment often focusing more on disease progression or
on side effects.
The principal scientific studies have generally focused on showing effectiveness for a single parameter (e.g., spasticity, pain, etc.). However, in practice there are often improvements
across a number of different symptoms many of which may be of significant value to the patient
(Box 22.1). Therefore the assessment needs to be customized to the individual.
Some have suggested that a patient should only continue with Sativex® if a 20% improvement in
spasticity has been obtained. However, it can be difficult to quantify the improvement in spasticity
clinically over a period of time with the same degree of accuracy achieved in clinical trials. The
impact of other benefits such as a reduction in the number of spasms, an improvement in sleep,
and a benefit to the partner in a reduction of their work load in caring for the patient, should all
be included (Notcutt 2012b). A preliminary study on the use of nabilone and ongoing assessment
showed a poor standard of evaluation of dosing, benefit, and side effects (Notcutt et al. 2011).
Therefore a schedule of parameters to guide the physician/nurse evaluating the patient using a
cannabinoid is being developed so that a better standard of information collection is available in
ordinary clinical practice (Table 22.2). Whether one uses a numeric rating score, widely used in
the formal studies of effectiveness for spasticity and pain, or simple verbal rating scores or patient
and carer impressions of change, may vary according to the circumstances of cannabinoid use.
To note that a patient stops screaming out in pain whenever they are being washed, is a suitable
measure (patient of WN).
22.5.9 Discontinuation of cannabinoids

Patients who have been using cannabinoids on a long-term basis may wish or need to discontinue
their cannabinoid either permanently or on a temporary basis to assess their symptom control. In
general a short downward titration period of a few days would seem reasonable although cannabinoids may take several weeks to be completely eliminated from the body. Patients may experience
a return of their symptoms but a withdrawal syndrome is very unlikely, although sleep and mood
may be upset temporarily (Notcutt et al. 2012a).

427

428

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Table 22.2 A schedule of potential parameters for routine clinical assessment of effects of cannabinoid therapy
Cannabinoid assessment
Pattern of dosing

Patient’s ADLs

Morning dose
Midday dose
Evening dose
Night dose
Total/day (sprays or mg)

Sleep
Walking
Transferring
Dressing
Washing
Sex
Other

Target symptom assessment (numerical rating
score 0–10, verbal rating or similar)

Carer’s ADLs

Spasticity
Spasms
Pain problems
Sleep
Bladder dysfunction
Other

Sleep (carer)
Dressing/washing (patient)
Transferring
Other

Side effect assessment

Changes to other medications

Oral mucosa (Sativex® only)
Drowsiness
Dizziness
Hallucinations, dysphoria
Other

Baclofen, tizanidine
Antidepressants
Gabapentin, pregabalin, carbamazepine, etc.
Opioids

Unexpected benefits

Other comments

22.5.10 Emergency or elective admission to hospital

If a patient is admitted for an unrelated emergency condition or elective surgery then limited experience so far suggests it is acceptable to continue with cannabinoid treatment unless there is an absolute
contraindication. However, this needs to be assessed on an individual basis, recognizing that symptoms of spasticity or pain may rapidly get worse thereby adding to the burden of the disease process.
Unrelated pain from an injury or disease should be treated in the normal way using conventional analgesics and the usual pain management strategies.
22.5.11 Travel abroad

If patients wish to travel abroad, they will need advice on the regulations for carrying cannabinoids into another country. An embassy should be able to provide information about the local
regulations and the legality. In the UK, a Home Office license is not needed for users when leaving the country. Patients should always carry a letter detailing their travel arrangements, medical
condition, and the medicines they will be carrying. A contact telephone number for the patient’s
general practitioner is also useful.
22.5.12 Long-term use

The long-term studies on Sativex® and the clinical experience from patients using cannabinoids
for several years have indicated that the dose of cannabinoid remains relatively stable once an

Cannabinoids in Clinical Practice: A UK Perspective

optimum dose has been established. Therefore any reasons for increasing the dose need to be
carefully evaluated.
So far there is no evidence of long-term side effects emerging (e.g., dependency, tolerance, and
mental health effects) and therefore careful assessment of any apparent new problem is essential
to determine etiology. It should be remembered that new CNS symptoms may not be caused by
the patient’s cannabinoid therapy, but by their underlying disease.
Sativex® has been evaluated as an add-on therapy for intractable symptoms, uncontrolled
by established therapies. Therefore, once the overall benefit is established, the value of any
other medicines needs to be reviewed to ensure optimum management and avoid ineffective
medication.

22.6 Summary
Although the use of cannabis as a medicine has a long history, its formal use in modern medicine is still in its infancy. Whilst there is still very little research into this class of medicines in
comparison to other established medicines, the safety profile is impressive. The development of
medicinal-grade products has allowed high-quality research, especially in the field of neurological
disease, particularly when set against previous studies on medicines for spasticity (Shakespeare
et al. 2003).
As with any new class of medicine, it takes time to establish a widespread clinical experience.
This needs to start with an understanding of the basic science but sadly, teaching on the endocannabinoid system is still sparse, despite 20 years of knowledge of the system. Undoubtedly there
will be more to learn on the practical use of medicinal cannabinoids as confidence in their medicinal use develops and new therapeutic areas emerge.

References
Abrams, D.I., Jay, C.A., Shade, S.B., et al. (2007). Cannabis in painful HIV-associated sensory neuropathy:
a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Neurology, 68, 515–521.
Aragona, M., Onesti, E., Tomassini, V., et al. (2009). Psychopathological and cognitive effects of therapeutic cannabinoids in multiple sclerosis: a double-blind, placebo controlled, crossover study. Clinical
Neuropharmacology, 32, 41–47.
Asbridge, M., Hayden, J.A., and Cartwright, J.L. (2012). Acute cannabis consumption and motor vehicle collision risk: systematic review of observational studies and meta-analysis. British Medical Journal, 344, e536.
Blake, D.R., Robson, P., Ho, M., Jubb, R.W., and McCabe, C.S. (2006). Preliminary assessment of the efficacy, tolerability and safety of a cannabis-based medicine (Sativex) in the treatment of pain caused by
rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology, 45, 50–52.
Brady, C.M., DasGupta, R., Dalton, C., et al. (2004). An open-label pilot study of cannabis-based extracts
for bladder dysfunction in advanced multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis, 10, 425–433.
Calhoun, S.R., Galloway, G.P., and Smith, D.E. (1998). Abuse potential of dronabinol (Marinol). Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs, 30, 187–196.
Campbell, F.A., Tramer, M.R., Carroll, D., et al. (2001). Are cannabinoids an effective and safe treatment
option in the management of pain? A qualitative systematic review. British Medical Journal, 323, 13–16.
Cichewicz, D.L., Martin, Z.L., Smith, F.L., and Welch, S.P. (1999). Enhancement mu opioid antinociception by oral delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol: dose-response analysis and receptor identification. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 289, 859–867.
Collin, C., Ehler, E., Waberzinek, G., et al. (2010). A double-blind, randomized, placebo controlled, parallelgroup study of Sativex, in subjects with symptoms of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis. Neurological
Research, 32, 451–459.

429

430

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

D’Souza, D.C., Abi-Saab, W.M., Madonick, S., et al. (2005). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol effects in schizophrenia: implications for cognition, psychosis, and addiction. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 594–608.
de Jong, B.C., Prentiss, D., McFarland, W., Machekano, R., and Israelski, D.M. (2005). Marijuana use and
its association with adherence to antiretroviral therapy among HIV-infected persons with moderate to
severe nausea. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 38, 43–46.
Degenhardt, L., and Hall, W. (2002). Cannabis and psychosis. Current Psychiatric Reports, 4, 191–196.
Dunn, S.L., Wilkinson, J.M., Crawford, A., Le Maitre, C.L., and Bunning, R.A. (2012). Cannabinoids:
novel therapies for arthritis? Future Medicinal Chemistry, 4, 713–725.
Ellis, R.J., Toperoff, W., Vaida, F., et al. (2009). Smoked medicinal cannabis for neuropathic pain in HIV:
a randomized, crossover clinical trial. Neuropsychopharmacology, 34, 672–680.
Esfandyari, T., Camilleri, M., Busciglio, I., et al. (2007). Effects of a cannabinoid receptor agonist on
colonic motor and sensory functions in humans: a randomized, placebo-controlled study. American
Journal of Physiology – Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 293, 137–145.
Esfandyari, T., Camilleri, M., Ferber, I., et al. (2006). Effect of a cannabinoid agonist on gastrointestinal
transit and postprandial satiation in healthy human subjects: a randomized, placebo-controlled study.
Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 18, 831–838.
Flynn, J. and Hanif, N. (1992). Nabilone for the management of intractable nausea and vomiting in terminally staged AIDS. Journal of Palliative Care, 8, 46–47.
Ganon-Elazar, E. and Akirav, I. (2009). Cannabinoid receptor activation in the basolateral amygdala blocks
the effects of stress on the conditioning and extinction of inhibitory avoidance. Journal of Neuroscience,
29, 11078–11088.
Gloss, D. and Vickrey, B. (2012). Cannabinoids for epilepsy. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 6,
CD009270.
Grotenhermen, F. (2001). Harm reduction associated with inhalation and oral administration of cannabis
and THC. Journal of Cannabis Therapy, 1, 133–152.
Grotenhermen, F. (2003). Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of cannabinoids. Clinical
Pharmacokinetics, 42, 327–360.
Grotenhermen F. and Müller-Vahl, K. (2012). The therapeutic potential of cannabis and cannabinoids.
Deutsches Arzteblatt International, 109, 495–501.
Hall, W. (1998). The respiratory risks of cannabis smoking. Addiction, 93, 1461–1463.
Haney, M., Gunderson, E.W., Rabkin, J., et al. (2007). Dronabinol and marijuana in HIV-positive marijuana smokers. Caloric intake, mood, and sleep. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 45,
545–554.
Henquet, C., Krabbendam, L., Spauwen, J., et al. (2005). Prospective cohort study of cannabis use, predisposition for psychosis, and psychotic symptoms in young people. British Medical Journal, 330, 11.
Henry, J.A., Oldfield, W.L.G., and Kon, O.M. (2003). Comparing cannabis with tobacco. British Medical
Journal, 326, 942–943.
Hoffman, D.E. and Weber, E. (2010). Medical marijuana and the law. New England Journal of Medicine,
362, 1453–1456.
Holdcroft, A., Mervyn, M., Dore, C., Tebbs, S., and Thompson, S. (2006). A multicenter dose-escalation
study of the analgesic and adverse effects of an oral cannabis extract (cannador) for postoperative pain
management. Anesthesiology, 104, 1040–1046.
Jiang, W., Zhang, Y., Xiao, L., et al. (2005). Cannabinoids promote embryonic and adult hippocampus
neurogenesis and produce anxiolytic and antidepressant-like effects. Journal of Clinical Investigation,
115, 3104–3116.
Johns, A. (2001). Pyschiatric effects of cannabis. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 178, 116–122.
Johnson, J.R., Burnell-Nugent, M., Lossignol, D., et al. (2010). Multicenter, double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled, parallel-group study of the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of THC: CBD extract and

Cannabinoids in Clinical Practice: A UK Perspective

THC extract in patients with intractable cancer-related pain. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management,
39, 167–179.
Jones, N.A., Hill, A.J., Smith, I., et al. (2010). Cannabidiol displays antiepileptiform and antiseizure properties in vitro and in vivo. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 332, 569–577.
Karst, M., Wippermann, S., and Ahrens, J. (2010). Role of cannabinoids in the treatment of pain and
(painful) spasticity. Drugs, 70, 2409–2438.
Leweke, F.M., Giuffrida, A., Koethe, D., et al. (2007). Anandamide levels in cerebrospinal fluid of firstepisode schizophrenic patients: impact of cannabis use. Schizophrenia Research, 94, 29–36.
Liu, D.Z., Hu, C.M., Huang, C.H., Wey, S.P., and Jan, T.R. (2010). Cannabidiol attenuates delayed-type
hypersensitivity reactions via suppressing T-cell and macrophage reactivity. Acta Pharmacoligica Sinica,
31, 1611–1617.
Lynch, M.E. and Campbell, F. (2011). Cannabinoids for treatment of chronic non-cancer pain; a systematic
review of randomized trials. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 72, 735–744.
Meek, C. (1994). Doctors want cannabis prescriptions allowed. British Medical Association News Review, 15
February, 15.
Meiri, E., Jhangiani, H., Vredenburgh, J.J., et al. (2007 ). Efficacy of dronabinol alone and in combination
with ondansetron versus ondansetron alone for delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.
Current Medical Research and Opinion, 23, 533–543.
Naftali, T., Bar Lev, L., Yablekovitz, D., Half, E., and Konikoff, F.M. (2011). Treatment of Crohn’s disease
with cannabis: an observational study. Israel Medical Association Journal, 13, 455–458.
Notcutt, W., Langford, R., Davies, P., Ratcliffe, S., and Potts, R. (2012a). A placebo-controlled, parallelgroup, randomized withdrawal study of subjects with symptoms of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis
who are receiving long-term Sativex (nabiximols). Multiple Sclerosis, 18, 219–228.
Notcutt, W., Price, M., and Chapman, G. (1997). Clinical experience with nabilone for chronic pain.
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 3, 551–555.
Notcutt, W., Price, M., Miller, R., et al. (2004). Initial experiences with medicinal extracts of cannabis for
chronic pain: results from 34 ‘N of 1’ studies. Anaesthesia, 59, 440–452.
Notcutt, W.G. (2012b). A questionnaire survey of patients and carers of patients prescribed Sativex as an
unlicensed medicine. Primary Health Care Research and Development, 12, 1–8.
Notcutt, W.G., Rocket, M., Zajicek, J., and Muthusamy, K. (2011). A retrospective description of the use
of nabilone in UK clinical practice. British Pain Society Annual Scientific Meeting, Poster Presentation.
Novotna, A., Mares, J., Ratcliffe, S., et al. (2011). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallelgroup, enriched-design study of nabiximols (Sativex), as add-on therapy, in subjects with refractory
spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis. European Journal of Neurology, 18, 1122–1131.
Nurmikko, T.J., Serpell, M.G., Hoggart, B., et al. (2007). Sativex successfully treats neuropathic pain
characterised by allodynia: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Pain, 133,
210–220.
Nutt, D.J., King, L.A., and Phillips, L.D., Independent Scientific Committee on Drugs. (2010). Drug
harms in the UK: a multicriteria decision analysis. Lancet, 376, 1558–1565.
Pertwee, R.G. (2004). The pharmacology and therapeutic potential of cannabidiol. In: V. Di Marzo (ed.).
Cannabinoids. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, pp. 32–83.
Portenoy, R.K., Ganae-Motan, E.D., Allende, S., et al. (2012). Nabiximols for opioid-treated cancer
patients with poorly-controlled chronic pain: a randomized, placebo-controlled, graded-dose trial. The
Journal of Pain, 13, 438–449.
Robson, P. (2011). Abuse potential and psychoactive effects of d-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol
oromucosal spray (Sativex), a new cannabinoid medicine. Expert Opinion on Drug Safety, 10, 675–685.
Rog, D.J., Nurmikko, T.J., Friede, T., and Young, C.A. (2005). Randomized, controlled trial of cannabis
based medicine in central pain in multiple sclerosis. Neurology, 65, 812–819.

®

431

432

MEDICINAL CANNABIS AND CANNABINOIDS: CLINICAL DATA

Roser, P. and Haussleiter, I.S. (2012). Antipsychotic-like effects of cannabidiol and rimonabant: systematic
review of animal and human studies. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 32, 5141–5155.
Russo, E. (2004). Clinical endocannabinoid deficiency (CECD): can this concept explain therapeutic benefits of cannabis in migraine, fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome and other treatment-resistant conditions? Neuroendocrinology Letters, 25, 31–39.
Russo, E. and Guy, G.W. (2006). A tale of two cannabinoids: the therapeutic rationale for combining tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol. Medical Hypotheses, 66, 234–246.
Schoedel, K.A., Chen, N., Hilliard, A., et al. (2011). A randomized, double blind, placebo controlled, crossover study to evaluate the subjective abuse potential and cognitive effects of nabiximols oromucosal
spray in subjects with a history of recreational cannabis use. Human Psychopharmacology: Clinical and
Experimental, 26, 224–236.
Scotter, E.L., Abood, M.E., and Glass, M. (2010). The endocannabinoid system as a target for the treatment
of neurodegenerative disease. British Journal of Pharmacology, 160, 480–498.
Seeling, W., Kneer, L., Büchele, B., et al. (2006). Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and the opioid receptor
agonist piritramide do not act synergistically in postoperative pain. Anaesthesist, 55, 391–400.
Serpell, M., Notcutt, W., and Collin, C. (2013). Sativex long-term use: an open-label trial in patients with
spasticity due to multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neurology, 260, 285–295.
Sexton, B.F., Tunbridge, R.J., Brook-Carter, N., et al. (2000). The Influence Of Cannabis On Driving.
Report 477. London: UK Department of the Environment. Available at: http://www.erowid.org/plants/
cannabis/cannabis_driving6.pdf.
Shakespeare, D.T., Boggild, M., and Young, C. (2003). Anti-spasticity agents for multiple sclerosis.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 4, CD001332.
Skrabek, R.Q., Galimova, L., Ethans, K., and Perry, D. (2008). Nabilone for the treatment of pain in fibromyalgia. Journal of Pain, 9, 164–173.
Strasser, F., Luftner, D., Possinger, K., et al. (2006). Comparison of orally administered cannabis extract
and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in treating patients with cancer-related anorexia-cachexia syndrome:
a multicenter, phase III, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial from the CannabisIn-Cachexia-Study-Group. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 24, 3394–400.
Vermersch, P. (2011). Sativex (Tetrahydrocannabinol + cannabidiol), an endocannabinoid system modulator: basic features and main clinical data. Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics, 11, 15–19.
Wade, D. (2012). Evaluation of the safety and tolerability profile of Sativex: is it reassuring enough? Expert
Review of Neurotherapeutics, 12, 9–14.
Wade, D.T., Collin, C., Stott, C., and Duncombe, P. (2010). Meta-analysis of the efficacy and safety of
Sativex (nabiximols), on spasticity in people with multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis, 16, 707–714.
Ware, M.A., Fitzcharles, M.A., Joseph, L., and Shir, Y. (2010). The effects of nabilone on sleep in fibromyalgia: results of a randomized controlled trial. Anesthesia and Analgesia, 110, 604–610.
Ware, M.A. and St Arnaud-Trempe, E. (2010). The abuse potential of the synthetic cannabinoid nabilone.
Addiction, 105, 494–503.
Yassa, H.A., Dawood Ael, W., Shehata, M.M., Abdel-Hady, R.H., and Aal, K.M. (2010). Subchronic toxicity of cannabis leaves on male albino rats. Human and Experimental Toxicology, 29, 37–47.
Zajicek, J., Fox, P., Sanders, H., et al. (2003). Cannabinoids for treatment of spasticity and other symptoms
related to multiple sclerosis (CAMS study): multicentre randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet,
362, 1517–1526.
Zajicek, J.P., Hobart, J.C., Slade, A., Barnes, D., and Mattison, P.G. (2012). Multiple sclerosis and extract of
cannabis: results of the MUSEC trial. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 83, 1125–1132.

®

Part 4

Approved Therapeutic Targets
for Phytocannabinoids:
Preclinical Pharmacology
Marnie Duncan

Part 4 Overview
In Chapter 23, Rock, Sticht, and Parker review the effects of cannabinoids on
nausea and vomiting. The authors highlight nausea as an area of the unmet
medical need. They review the preclinical data for phytocannabinoids such
as cannabidiol (CBD), cannabidiolic acid (CBDA), tetrahydrocannabinolic acid
(THCA), and cannabidivarin (CBDV), which show efficacy in preclinical models
of nausea and vomiting.
In Chapter 24, Cristino and Di Marzo provide an extensive review of the
endocannabinoid system in the homeostatic regulation of food intake. They
describe the effects of cannabinoids on appetite and suggest that these
compounds may represent therapeutic candidates for the treatment of
cachexia and anorexia.
In Chapter 25, Costa and Comelli review the large body of literature on the
analgesic actions of THC and cover the possible interaction between the opioid
and cannabinoid systems. The authors also present preclinical evidence that
the non-psychoactive phytocannabinoids CBD, tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV),
cannabigerol (CBG), and cannabichromene (CBC) may be possible candidates
for the treatment of pain.
In Chapter 26, Pryce and Baker provide an extensive overview of the disease
progression of the various types of multiple sclerosis (MS) and the underlying
pathologies. The authors describe the body of clinical evidence of cannabinoids
in MS and highlight the difficulties in measuring beneficial effects in clinical
trials.

Chapter 23

Effect of Phytocannabinoids on Nausea
and Vomiting
Erin M. Rock, Martin A. Sticht, and Linda A. Parker

23.1 Introduction
As has been reviewed elsewhere, Cannabis sativa has been used as a medicine for over 5000 years
(see Hanus and Mechoulam 2005; Iversen 2008). Only much more recently was the psychoactive cannabinoid, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC), discovered (Gaoni and Mechoulam
1964a). Since this discovery, over 60 unique terpeno-phenols have been derived from the cannabis plant, which Mechoulam (2007) describes as a “neglected pharmacological treasure trove.”
There has been little investigation of these neglected compounds until very recently. In this
chapter, recent findings on the potential of phytocannabinoids to reduce nausea and vomiting are
reviewed. First, however, we present the history of current treatments for chemotherapy-induced
nausea and vomiting, which is currently in need of specific treatments for nausea. In order to
evaluate treatments for nausea, preclinical models are required. Currently available models are
described here. Finally, the current status of phytocannabinoids as treatments for nausea and
vomiting is reviewed, with links to more recent work on the role of the endocannabinoid (eCB)
system in the regulation of nausea and vomiting.

23.2 Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
The treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting has been revolutionized by the
discovery that antagonism of the 5-hydroxytryptamine-3 (5-HT3) receptor suppresses acute vomiting induced by cisplatin in the ferret and the shrew (e.g., Costall et al. 1986; Miner and Sanger
1986; Torii et al. 1991). Treating human patients with 5-HT3 receptor antagonists combined with
the corticosteroid, dexamethasone, has reduced the incidence of acute vomiting (within 18–24 h
post treatment) by 70% (e.g., Hickok et al. 2003). The 5-HT3 receptor antagonists are less effective
at suppressing acute nausea (e.g., only 18% reported nausea relief) than they are at suppressing
acute vomiting and they are ineffective in reducing delayed (over 24 h later, e.g., Hesketh et al.
2003) and anticipatory (conditioned) nausea and vomiting (e.g., Ballatori and Roila 2003; Hickok
et al. 2003; Morrow and Dobkin 1988; Nesse et al. 1980) when they occur. The development of the
Neurokinin 1 (NK1) receptor antagonists (e.g., aprepitant) has further aided in the suppression
of acute vomiting, and decreased delayed vomiting resulting from cisplatin-based chemotherapy
(e.g., Van Belle et al. 2002). Still however, even combined treatment with a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, a NK1 receptor antagonist and dexamethasone is essentially ineffective in reducing acute
and delayed nausea (e.g., Hickok et al. 2003; Poli-Bigelli et al. 2003), which are the symptoms
reported to be the most distressing to cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy together with
5-HT3 receptor antagonist treatment (de Boer-Dennert et al. 1997). None of these treatments are

436

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

effective in reducing anticipatory nausea when it occurs. Therefore, nausea (acute, delayed, and
anticipatory) continues to be a challenge for available pharmacotherapies.
Patients report that nausea is more distressing than vomiting (e.g., de Boer-Dennert et al. 1997;
Foubert and Vaessen 2005). Indeed, this continuous distressing symptom associated with chemotherapy treatment (even when vomiting is pharmacologically controlled) can become so severe
that as many as 20% of patients discontinue their treatment (Jordan et al. 2005). Furthermore, several studies have found that both physicians and nurses tend to underestimate the prevalence of
nausea, particularly the delayed nausea, following chemotherapy over several days (e.g., Grunberg
et al. 2004; Liau et al. 2005). Therefore, new treatments for nausea are needed.

23.3 Animal models of nausea
Animal models of vomiting have been valuable in elucidating the neural mechanisms of the
emetic reflex (e.g., Hornby 2001); however, the central mechanisms regulating nausea are still not
well understood (e.g., Andrews and Horn 2006). Considerably greater progress has been made
toward the control of vomiting than the control of nausea. One reason is that nausea is much more
difficult to quantify than is vomiting, and therefore, preclinical model development has been
challenging. Although vomiting is a gastrointestinal event under control of brainstem structures
(e.g., Hornby 2001), it is generally agreed that activation of central forebrain structures is required
to produce the distinct sensation of nausea. The gastrointestinal visceral inputs to the brain are
well characterized (Cechetto and Saper 1987), but the way in which they are processed in the
forebrain, leading to the sensation of nausea, is only beginning to be understood. The major route
for visceral afferent information from the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) to the parabrachial
nucleus (PBN) in the brainstem projects to the granular insular cortex via routes including the
parvicellular thalamic nucleus (VPpc) (Cechetto and Saper 1987). Indeed the insular cortex (IC)
has been termed the ‘interoceptive cortex” and work in both animals (Contreras et al. 2007; Fiol
et al.; Kaada 1951; Kiefer and Orr 1992; Limebeer et al. 2012; Tuerke et al. 2012a) and humans
(e.g., Aziz et al. 2000; Catenoix et al. 2008; Penfield and Faulk 1955) suggests that the sensation of
nausea is generated in this cortical region.
One limitation in the preclinical screening of the nauseating side effect of compounds and the
potential of compounds to treat nausea has been the lack of a reliable preclinical rodent model of
nausea. In the following sections we describe the current models used to determine the nauseating
potential of compounds and to determine the potential of antinausea agents that reverse nausea.
These models do not rely upon the use of an animal capable of vomiting and have been primarily
employed in rodents, which lack an emetic reflex. Although rodents lack an emetic reflex, their
gastric afferents respond in the same manner to physical and chemical (intragastric copper sulfate
and cisplatin) stimulation that precedes vomiting in ferrets, presumably resulting in nausea that
precedes vomiting (Billig et al. 2001; Hillsley and Grundy 1998). Indeed, 5-HT3 receptor antagonists that block vomiting in ferrets also disrupts this preceding neural afferent reaction in rats,
suggesting that the rat detects nausea, but that the vomiting reaction may be absent in this species.
23.3.1 Pica

Consumption of non-nutritive kaolin clay, an example of pica (the eating of a nonfood substance),
is a putative direct indicator of nausea in rodents. This consumption may ameliorate the effects
of toxins in the diet (e.g., Mitchell et al. 1976; Rudd et al. 2002). Pica has been reported in several strains of rats and mice exposed to emetic compounds (e.g., Stern et al. 2011); however, in
emetic species, such as the Suncus murinus, pica has not been demonstrated (Liu et al. 2005; Stern

Effect of Phytocannabinoids on Nausea and Vomiting

et al. 2011; Yamamoto et al. 2004). Pica has the advantage of being a measure of unconditioned
nausea, but it has poor temporal resolution. In addition, it may be difficult to apply to a species
when intake is small, and it can be produced by factors other than nausea, such as stress or pain
(Burchfield et al. 1977); therefore it may not be selectively produced by nausea.
23.3.2 Lying on belly

Lying on belly (LOB) in rats (e.g., Parker et al. 1984) or flopping in ferrets (Stern et al. 2011) is
another behavior that has been characterized as a nausea-induced response. In rats, this behavior
has only been evaluated as a measure of lithium chloride (LiCl)-induced nausea (e.g., Bernstein
et al. 1992; Contreras et al. 2007; Tuerke et al. 2012b). No other emetic agents have been evaluated
using this measure. Both area postrema (AP) lesions (Bernstein et al. 1992) and visceral insular
cortex (VIC) lesions (Contreras et al. 2007) reduce LiCl-induced LOB. As well, pretreatment with
the 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, ondansetron, reduces LiCl-induced LOB in rats (Tuerke et al.
2012b). A major limitation in this measure of nausea-induced behavior, however, is the difficulty
in discriminating LOB from nonspecific locomotor suppression (e.g., Tuerke et al. 2012b); therefore, this measure may not be a specific model of nausea-induced behavior.
23.3.3 Conditioned taste avoidance

Another commonly employed rodent measure of nausea is conditioned taste avoidance learning (e.g., Garcia et al. 1974). This is not a direct measure of nausea, but relies upon a rodent’s
reluctance to consume flavors of foods that have been previously paired with nausea-inducing
treatments. However, conditioned flavor avoidance is not a selective measure of conditioned
nausea, because in the nonemetic rat, even drugs that are rewarding (such as amphetamine and
cocaine) produce conditioned taste avoidance (e.g., Berger 1972; Parker 1995 for review). As well,
antiemetic drugs do not necessarily prevent the establishment of conditioned taste avoidance
produced by a nausea-inducing drug, such as LiCl (Limebeer and Parker 2000; Rudd et al. 1998).
In the nonemetic rat, the conditioned taste avoidance measure may reflect a process more similar
to conditioned fear of any treatments that change the rat’s hedonic state following consumption of
a novel flavored solution (see Parker et al. 2008, 2009a).
23.3.4 Conditioned gaping
23.3.4.1 Conditioned gaping to a nausea-paired flavor

Considerable recent evidence indicates that conditioned disgust (gaping) reactions elicited by
exposure to a flavor previously paired with an emetic agent, such as LiCl, is a selective and sensitive rodent model of nausea (see Grill and Norgren 1978; Parker et al. 2008). Unlike conditioned
taste avoidance, only drugs which produce emetic reactions in species capable of vomiting produce conditioned gaping reactions in rats when paired with a flavor. As well, antiemetic drugs
consistently suppress the establishment of conditioned gaping reactions, without modifying
conditioned taste avoidance (see Parker et al. 2009a). Suppression of the establishment of nauseainduced conditioned gaping reactions by the antiemetic treatment serves as a model to evaluate
the potential of a treatment in reducing acute nausea. Most of the work on the effects of phytocannabinoids on nausea employs this model.
23.3.4.2 Conditioned gaping to a nausea-paired context

Interestingly, rats not only display conditioned gaping reactions when re-exposed to a flavor previously paired with a nausea-inducing drug, but they also display conditioned gaping reactions

437

438

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

when re-exposed to a context previously paired with a nausea-inducing drug (e.g., Chan et al.
2009; Limebeer et al. 2008; Rock et al. 2008). As well, Suncus murinus also displays conditioned
retching when re-exposed to a context previously paired with toxin-induced vomiting (Parker
and Kemp 2001; Parker et al. 2006). These contextually elicited conditioned gaping or retching reactions represent animal models of anticipatory nausea analogous to that experienced by
human chemotherapy patients, which can be produced following three to four conditioning trials. In human chemotherapy patients, when anticipatory nausea develops, the classic antiemetic
agent ondansetron is ineffective in reducing this symptom (Hickok et al. 2003); likewise rats and
shrews pretreated with ondansetron do not show a suppression of anticipatory nausea (gaping
and retching reactions, respectively; Limebeer et al. 2006; Parker and Kemp 2001; Parker et al.
2006; Rock et al. 2008).
The conditioned gaping model provides a tool for evaluating the potential of a treatment to
reduce both acute nausea (suppressed establishment of gaping during conditioning to a flavor)
and anticipatory nausea (suppressed expression of gaping during testing to a context) in rats.
This tool has the potential to reveal new treatments for these distressing symptoms that persist
in human chemotherapy patients, even with the development of highly effective treatments to
control vomiting.

23.4 Effects of synthetic and plant cannabinoids on nausea

and vomiting
As already mentioned, there is clearly a need of treatments for acute, delayed, and anticipatory
nausea in chemotherapy treatment. As well, although vomiting is well controlled by the firstline therapy, not all patients are responsive (Poli-Bigelli et al. 2003). One of the first recognized
medicinal benefits of cannabis was for the treatment of nausea and vomiting (e.g., Iversen 2008).
The most investigated compound has been Δ9-THC, however, other nonpsychoactive compounds
in the cannabis plant have recently been reported to also have benefits in preclinical models of
nausea and vomiting. This research is reviewed here.
23.4.1 Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol

Δ9-THC, the major psychoactive component in cannabis (Mechoulam et al. 1970), identified by
Gaoni and Mechoulam (1964a), effectively interferes with nausea and vomiting in nonhumans
(e.g., Parker et al. 2011) and in human cancer patients (see Cotter 2009 for review).
23.4.1.1 Δ9-THC and chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting

Nabilone (Cesamet®) an orally active, synthetic analogue of Δ9-THC, was licensed for management of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in 1985, but is only prescribed after conventional antiemetics fail (i.e., nabilone is not a first-line treatment). To our knowledge, studies have
only compared nabilone with dopamine receptor 2 (D2) receptor antagonists for their antiemetic/
antinausea effects in chemotherapy patients. When compared with D2 receptor antagonists, such
as metoclopramide, nabilone treatment resulted in fewer vomiting episodes (Ahmedzai et al.
1983; Herman et al. 1979; Pomeroy et al. 1986; Steele et al. 1980) and reports of nausea (Ahmedzai
et al. 1983; Dalzell et al. 1986; Herman et al. 1979) in patients taking moderately toxic chemotherapy treatments; however, when given to cancer patients receiving cisplatinum chemotherapy,
nabilone was only as effective as the D2 receptor antagonist in reducing vomiting (Crawford and
Buckman 1986). Therefore, nabilone is superior to D2 receptor antagonists for the treatment of
moderate emesis but probably not for the treatment of severe emesis.

Effect of Phytocannabinoids on Nausea and Vomiting

Another orally active, synthetic Δ9-THC known as dronabinol (Marinol®), has also been used
as an antiemetic and was later used as an appetite stimulant (Pertwee 2009). When compared with
prochlorperazine (a D2 receptor antagonist) or a combination of dronabinol and the D2 receptor
antagonist, those patients given the combination treatment had less severe nausea and the duration was significantly shorter than with either agent alone, when they were being treated with
moderately emetogenic chemotherapy (Lane et al. 1991). Most recently, Namisol ®, a tablet containing pure Δ9-THC, was designed to improve absorption after ingestion. Evidence in healthy
adults indicates its rapid onset may be beneficial for rapid therapeutic effects, but no clinical trials
have yet been completed to demonstrate its clinical efficacy (Klumpers et al. 2012).
In cancer patients, administration of oral Δ9-THC has been shown to significantly suppress
the experience of nausea and vomiting, in comparison to placebo controls (Chang et al. 1979;
Frytak et al. 1979; Orr et al. 1980; Sallan et al. 1975; Sweet et al. 1981) and when compared to
the D2 receptor antagonists available at the time, Δ9-THC was at least as effective (Carey et al.
1983; Crawford and Buckman 1986; Cunningham et al. 1988; Frytak et al. 1979; Tramèr et al.
2001; Ungerleider et al. 1984) if not more effective (Ekert et al. 1979; Orr and McKernan 1981)
at reducing nausea and vomiting. Only one published clinical trial has directly compared the
antiemetic and antinausea effects of a cannabinoid with a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist. Meiri et al.
(2007) compared dronabinol, ondansetron, or their combination, for efficacy in reducing delayed
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Dronabinol and ondansetron alone were equally
effective in reducing nausea and vomiting, but the combined therapies were no more effective
than either agent alone. When assessing severity of nausea alone, dronabinol was more effective
than ondansetron for mildly to moderately severe nausea produced by chemotherapy treatments,
but not for severe emetogenic treatments. However, there has been no report of a direct comparison of Δ9-THC and the current first-line treatment of 5-HT3 receptor antagonist/dexamethasone/
NK1 receptor antagonist on acute or delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea or vomiting in
human chemotherapy patients.
23.4.1.2 Δ9-THC and vomiting in animal models

The potential of Δ9-THC to reduce toxin-induced vomiting has been demonstrated in cats, dogs,
ferrets, and shrews. Early work revealed that nabilone reduced cisplatin-induced vomiting in cats
(London et al. 1979; McCarthy and Borison 1981). On the other hand, neither nabilone nor Δ9THC suppressed cisplatin- or apomorphine-induced vomiting in dogs (Gylys et al. 1979; Shannon
et al. 1979). In the ferret, Δ9-THC (0.5–1 mg/kg, intraperitoneally (i.p.)) and the synthetic CB1
receptor agonist, WIN55,212-2, effectively suppressed vomiting produced by both morphine6-glucuronide and cisplatin (Van Sickle et al. 2001, 2003) and these effects were reversed by CB1
receptor antagonism.
The insectivorous shrews are also capable of vomiting in response to toxins. Two species recently used to evaluate the potential of Δ9-THC and other CB1 receptor agonists to reduce vomiting
are the house musk shrew, or Suncus murinus (30–60 g body weight), and the much smaller least
shrew, or Cryptotis parva (4–6 g body weight). In the house musk shrew, Δ9-THC reduces cisplatin(Kwiatkowska et al. 2004), LiCl- (Parker et al. 2004), and motion-induced vomiting (Cluny et al.
2008). Interestingly, when combined, subthreshold doses (those that were ineffective alone) of
Δ9-THC and ondansetron completely abolished cisplatin-induced vomiting in the house musk
shrew (Kwiatkowska et al. 2004). In the tiny least shrew, Δ9-THC (>2.5 mg/kg, i.p.) reduces acute
cisplatin- (Darmani 2001a), rimonabant- (SR141716, a CB1 receptor antagonist, Darmani 2001b),
radiation- (Darmani et al. 2007) and 5-hydroxytryptophan- (an indirect 5-HT receptor agonist,
Darmani and Johnson 2004) induced vomiting. Similarly, the potent CB1 agonists, CP55,940 and

439

440

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

HU-210, have also been shown to suppress cisplatin-induced vomiting in least shrews (Darmani
et al. 2003). As reported by Kwiatkowska et al. (2004), and more recently by Wang et al. (2009), the
combination of low doses of Δ9-THC (0.25 and 0.5 mg/kg, i.p.) and a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist
(ondansetron (0.025 mg/kg, i.p.) or tropisetron (0.025–0.25 mg/kg, i.p.)) respectively were more
efficacious in reducing the frequency of emesis than each dose given individually, but higher
doses failed to show this interaction. Since Δ9-THC suppresses serotonin (5-HT)-induced vomiting it is possible that Δ9-THC may be acting at CB1 receptors located presynaptically on serotonergic neurons (Haring et al. 2007), possibly inhibiting 5-HT release (Darmani and Johnson 2004;
Howlett et al. 2002; Schlicker and Kathmann 2001) to exert its antiemetic effects.
The antiemetic properties of CB 1 receptor agonists, including Δ 9-THC, are subsequently
reversed by selective antagonism of CB1 receptors and these effects are typically mediated by
emetic brainstem structures located in the dorsal vagal complex (DVC) (see Horn 2008). For
example, Darmani et al. (2003) reported that CB1 receptor localization and activation following administration of CP55,940 occurred in DVC structures such as the NTS. In ferrets,
cannabinoid-induced suppression of vomiting was linked to activation of CB 1 receptors in the
DVC (Van Sickle et al. 2001), such that CB1 receptor agonism reduced subsequent neuronal
activation within the DVC in response to an emetic stimulus (Van Sickle et al. 2003). Taken
together, CB1 receptor agonists appear to exert their antiemetic effects within brainstem emetic
structures of the DVC.
23.4.1.3 Δ9-THC and acute nausea in animal models

Δ9-THC, has also been evaluated for its potential to interfere with nausea in animal models.
Although Δ9-THC has not been specifically evaluated for its antinausea effects in the pica model
of increased intake of kaolin, the synthetic CB1 receptor agonist, WIN 55,212-2 did not modify
pica produced by chronic administration of cisplatin (Vera et al. 2007). Using the conditioned
gaping measure, Δ9-THC (0.5 mg/kg, i.p.) and the CB1 receptor agonist, HU-210 (0.001–0.1 mg/
kg, i.p.) interfere with both the establishment and expression of cyclophosphamide- (Limebeer
and Parker 1999) and LiCl-induced conditioned gaping (Parker and Mechoulam 2003; Parker
et al. 2003), and this effect of Δ9-THC is reversed by CB1 receptor antagonists (rimonabant or
AM251), indicating a CB1 receptor mediation of Δ9-THC’s antinausea effects.
23.4.1.4 Δ9-THC and anticipatory nausea in animal models

Although pretreatment with ondansetron is ineffective in reducing contextually elicited conditioned gaping, Δ9-THC (0.5 mg/kg, i.p.) does reduce this kind of gaping in rats (Limebeer et al.
2006). Additionally, Δ9-THC (3 mg/kg, i.p.) pretreatment prior to re-introduction to a context
previously associated with LiCl-induced vomiting, suppresses the expression of conditioned
retching in Suncus murinus, a shrew model of anticipatory nausea (Parker and Kemp 2001; Parker
et al. 2006).
23.4.2 Cannabidiol

Another chemical compound in cannabis, cannabidiol (CBD), was first isolated in 1940 from
Mexican marihuana by Roger Adams and from Indian charas by Alexander Todd. It was not until
1963 that Mechoulam isolated CBD from Lebanese hashish and established its structure (see
Mechoulam and Hanus 2002). This nonpsychoactive cannabinoid is now available as a sublingual
spray called Nabidiolex® (GW Pharmaceuticals). There are no reports of any specific evaluation
of CBD alone to reduce nausea and vomiting in human chemotherapy patients.

Effect of Phytocannabinoids on Nausea and Vomiting

23.4.2.1 CBD and vomiting in animal models

In the house musk shrew, CBD produces a biphasic effect, at low doses (5 and 10 mg/kg, subcutaneously (s.c.)) suppressing acute cisplatin- and LiCl induced vomiting (Rock et al. 2011, 2012),
but at high doses (40 mg/kg, i.p.) potentiating (Kwiatkowska et al. 2004) or having no effect
(Darmani et al. 2007) on the production of such vomiting. CBD does not attenuate motioninduced vomiting (Cluny et al. 2008), but its acid precursor (CBDA) is highly effective (Bolognini
et al. 2013). The suppression of LiCl-induced vomiting was not reversed by the CB 1 receptor
antagonist rimonabant (Parker et al. 2004), but was reversed by the 5-hydroxytryptamine-1A
(5-HT1A) receptor antagonist WAY100135 (Rock et al. 2012).
23.4.2.2 CBD and acute nausea in animal models

In rats, CBD (5 mg/kg, i.p. or s.c.) has been shown to reduce acute nausea produced by LiCl
(Parker and Mechoulam 2003: Parker et al. 2002; Rock et al. 2011, 2012). The CBD-induced suppression of acute nausea is reversed by administration of the 5-HT1A antagonists WAY100135
and WAY100635 (Rock et al. 2012). In addition, when administered directly to the dorsal raphe
nucleus (DRN), CBD (10 micrograms) completely abolished LiCl-induced conditioned gaping
and this effect was blocked by systemic administration of WAY100635. Conversely, systemic
administration of CBD was blocked by intra-DRN administration of WAY100635, but not when
WAY100635 was administered outside of the DRN. Furthermore, combined subthreshold doses
of CBD and 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino) tetralin (8-OH-DPAT, a 5-HT1A receptor agonist)
enhanced suppression of acute nausea, above that of either agent alone. CBD also displayed significant potency (with a bell shaped dose-response curve) at enhancing the ability of 8-OH-DPAT to
stimulate [35S]GTPγS binding to rat brainstem membranes in vitro. Taken together, these results
indicate a 5-HT1A receptor-linked mechanism of action for CBD’s antinausea properties. More
specifically, it seems that CBD may be acting at somatodendritic 5-HT1A autoreceptors located in
the DRN to reduce the release of 5-HT in forebrain regions (e.g., possibly the interoceptive insular
cortex (Tuerke et al. 2012a)) to ultimately suppress toxin-induced nausea and vomiting.
23.4.2.3 CBD and anticipatory nausea in animal models

In addition, low doses of CBD (5 mg/kg, i.p.) but not ondansetron, have also been shown to suppress anticipatory nausea in shrews when administered prior to placement in a context previously
paired with vomiting (Parker et al. 2006). In rats, CBD at low doses (1 and 5 mg/kg, i.p.) also interfered with the expression of conditioned gaping to a context previously paired with LiCl, while a
higher dose (10 mg/kg, i.p.) did not (Rock et al. 2008). Therefore, CBD may be a nonpsychoactive
alternative to Δ9-THC as a treatment for anticipatory nausea in human chemotherapy patients;
however, its narrow range of dose efficacy may be problematic.
23.4.3 Combined Δ9-THC and CBD

Interestingly, there have been no reports of the evaluation of combined Δ 9-THC and CBD on
emesis or nausea in animal models. However in humans, a phase II clinical trial evaluated Sativex®
(an oromucosally administered cannabis-based medicine containing Δ9-THC and CBD in a 1:1
ratio), taken in conjunction with standard antiemetic therapies (5-HT3 receptor antagonists), for
its ability to control delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (Duran et al. 2010).
When compared with placebo, Sativex® reduced the incidence of delayed nausea and vomiting
and was well tolerated by patients. Fifty-seven percent of Sativex® patients experienced no delayed
nausea compared to 22% in the placebo group. In terms of emesis, 71% of Sativex® patients versus

441

442

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

22% of placebo patients experienced no delayed emesis. These results indicate that Δ9-THC and
CBD in combination may be useful in managing delayed nausea and vomiting in human patients.
23.4.4 Cannabidiolic acid

The nonpsychoactive carboxylic acidic precursor of CBD, cannabidiolic acid (CBDA), is present in
the fresh cannabis plant and slowly loses its acidic function (decarboxylates) in the plant in response
to heating (e.g., when cannabis is smoked). Recent evidence indicates that CBDA (0.1 and/or 0.5
mg/kg, i.p.) potently interferes with motion-, LiCl-, and cisplatin-induced vomiting in Suncus murinus (Bolognini et al. 2013). CBDA also reduced acute nausea produced by LiCl, an effect that was
prevented by pretreatment with the 5-HT1A receptor antagonist, WAY100635, and not by rimonabant. CBDA also increased the ability of the 5-HT1A receptor agonist, 8-OH-DPAT, to potently
stimulate [35S]GTPγS binding to rat brainstem membrane, again without activating CB1 receptors
in vitro or in vivo. More recently, CBDA has been shown to reduce acute nausea at a dose as low as
0.5 microgram/kg (Rock and Parker 2013). As well, a subthreshold dose of CBDA (0.1 micrograms/
kg, i.p.) enhanced the ability of a mildly effective dose of ondansetron (1 microgram/kg) to reduce
LiCl-induced acute nausea in the rat flavor-induced gaping model.
CBDA also suppressed contextually elicited conditioned gaping in the rodent model of anticipatory nausea and this effect was also reversed by the 5-HT1A receptor antagonist, WAY100635
(Bolognini et al. 2013). CBDA potently suppresses nausea and vomiting in a 5-HT 1A receptor
dependent manner, suggesting that CBDA could be developed as a potent and selective treatment
for nausea and vomiting, perhaps particularly for the treatment of anticipatory nausea, as there
is no current therapeutic available once anticipatory nausea does develop. CBDA is also promising for development as a treatment for acute nausea, because unlike CBD, it does not potentiate
nausea and/or vomiting at high doses. It is active at much lower doses than CBD, but at high doses
is merely ineffective.
23.4.5 Tetrahydrocannabinolic acid

The carboxylic acidic precursor of Δ9-THC is tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA) (Gaoni and
Mechoulam 1964a). In the fresh plant, THCA is decarboxylated to THC by heating or burning.
Interestingly, no psychotomimetic activity was observed when THCA was administered to: rhesus
monkeys at doses up to 5 mg/kg (intravenously, i.v.), mice at doses up to 20 mg/kg (i.p.), and dogs
at doses up to 7 mg/kg (Grunfeld and Edery 1969).
Recent results from our laboratory (Rock et al. 2013a) indicate that THCA (0.5 and 0.05 mg/
kg, i.p.) reduced LiCl-induced vomiting in Suncus murinus, an effect that was reversed with
rimonabant pretreatment. THCA (0.5 and 0.05 mg/kg i.p.) also reduced conditioned gaping
elicited by a flavor, with no effect on conditioning hedonics or conditioned taste avoidance.
When administered at the lower of these two doses (0.05 mg/kg, i.p.), Δ9-THC did not suppress conditioned gaping to a LiCl-paired flavor, or have an effect on conditioning hedonics
or conditioned taste avoidance. In the anticipatory nausea paradigm, THCA (0.05 mg/kg, i.p.)
suppressed conditioned gaping elicited by a context previously paired with LiCl-induced illness,
while an identical low dose of Δ9-THC (0.05 mg/kg, i.p.) did not reduce conditioned gaping to
a LiCl-paired context. The effect of THCA on anticipatory nausea was reversed by pretreatment
with rimonabant (2.5 mg/kg, i.p.), but not by the 5-HT1A receptor antagonist, WAY100635 (0.1
mg/kg, i.p.), suggesting a CB1 receptor dependent mechanism of action. Thus, THCA appears
to be a more potent antinausea treatment than Δ9-THC, and to lack Δ9-THC-like psychoactive
properties.

Effect of Phytocannabinoids on Nausea and Vomiting

Although our in vivo results suggest a CB1 receptor-mediated mechanism for THCA’s effects,
the few published in vitro studies to date do not seem to support this finding. In vitro studies
have revealed that THCA’s ability to inhibit the tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) in culture
supernatants from U937 macrophages was not blocked by administration of the CB 1 receptor antagonist AM281, or the cannabinoid receptor type 2 (CB 2) receptor antagonist AM630
(Verhoeckx et al. 2006). In addition, binding assays indicate that THCA is not active at the CB1
receptor (Ahmed et al. 2008). Further studies about THCA’s mechanism of action are needed.
These latest results indicate that THCA may also be a better therapeutic treatment for nausea and
vomiting than Δ9-THC.
23.4.6 Tetrahydrocannabivarin

Tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV), identified in the 1970s (Gill et al. 1970; Merkus 1971) was
initially described as sharing the ability of Δ9-THC to produce signs of catalepsy in the mouse
ring mobility test (Gill et al. 1970) and to produce mild Δ9-THC-like effects in humans (Hollister
1974). More recently, synthetic THCV (0–4394) at doses greater than 10 mg/kg i.v., was shown to
resemble the effects of Δ9-THC on catalepsy, and to induce antinociception in the tail-flick test
(Pertwee et al. 2007); this latter effect was reversed with rimonabant (3 mg/kg, i.p.).
THCV effects are dose dependent, with lower doses (2.5 mg/kg, i.v.) of THCV acting as a CB1
receptor antagonist (Pertwee et al. 2007). At low doses, THCV blocks the effects of Δ9-THC.
More specifically, 0–4394 attenuates Δ9-THC induced hypothermia at 0.3 and 3 mg/kg, i.v. and
Δ9-THC-induced antinociception in the tail-flick test at 3 mg/kg, i.v. (Pertwee et al. 2007). There
is also evidence that THCV shares the ability of AM251 to reduce food intake and body weight of
nonfasted and fasted nonobese mice (Riedel 2009).
The low-dose THCV (0–4394) effects of CB1 receptor antagonism, in contrast to rimonabant,
are devoid of inverse agonist activity in the [ 35S]GTPγS-binding assay in mouse whole-brain
membranes (Pertwee et al. 2007). Indeed, unlike rimonabant, THCV is also devoid of anxiogenic
activity in the light/dark immersion test and does not reduce saccharin palatability in the taste
reactivity test (O’Brien et al. 2012). Interestingly, the CB1 receptor neutral antagonists, AM6545
and AM6527, also do not modify saccharin palatability in the taste reactivity test, unlike AM251
(Limebeer et al. 2010). Furthermore, THCV (2.5–20 mg/kg, i.p.), unlike rimonabant (10 mg/kg,
i.p.) did not produce nausea in the gaping model.
Evaluation of the effects of THCV and rimonabant on the establishment of LiCl-induced
conditioned gaping (Rock et al. 2013b) revealed that unlike rimonabant (2.5 mg/kg, i.p.), which
enhances LiCl-induced conditioned gaping reactions, THCV (10 or 20 mg/kg, but not 2.5 mg/
kg, i.p.) reduces LiCl-induced conditioned gaping, as does the CB 1 receptor agonist, Δ9-THC
(Limebeer and Parker 1999). This finding supports previous research suggesting that THCV may
act as a CB1 receptor agonist at high doses (Pertwee et al. 2007; Thomas et al. 2005). At a low dose
of 2.5 mg/kg, i.p., THCV did not potentiate LiCl-induced acute nausea, unlike rimonabant, again
providing evidence that this phytocannabinoid does not act as a CB1 receptor inverse agonist.
The CB1 receptor inverse agonists, rimonabant and AM251, potentiate LiCl-induced nausea at
doses below those that produce nausea on their own, unlike the CB1 receptor neutral antagonists,
AM4113, AM6545, or AM6527 (Cluny et al. 2010; Limebeer et al. 2010; McLaughlin et al. 2005;
Sink et al. 2008). Therefore, at low doses, THCV acts as a neutral CB1 receptor antagonist, but at
high doses it may act as a CB1 receptor agonist, reducing nausea like a low dose of Δ9-THC (0.5
mg/kg, i.p.). Future studies need to further examine the dose-dependent effects of THCV on nausea and vomiting in animal models.

443

444

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

23.4.7 Cannabidivarin

In the cannabis plant, cannabidivarin (CBDV) is the precursor of THCV, and under acidic conditions, CBDV isomerizes into THCV (Deiana et al. 2012). Recent evidence from our laboratory
(Rock et al. 2013b) shows that CBDV (10 or 200 mg/kg, i.p.) attenuated LiCl-induced gaping reactions and does not act as a CB1 receptor inverse agonist; that is it neither produced gaping on its
own, nor potentiated LiCl-induced gaping reactions (Rock et al. 2013b). Therefore it seems that
this phytocannabinoid may be a promising therapeutic, devoid of symptoms associated with CB1
receptor inverse agonism.
23.4.8 Cannabigerol

Cannabigerol (CBG) is another nonpsychoactive component found in cannabis (Gaoni and
Mechoulam 1964b; Mechoulam et al. 1970), but little work has focused on this agent. Recently, in
vitro (Cascio et al. 2010) and in vivo (Rock et al. 2011) data have indicated that CBG may be acting
as a 5-HT1A receptor antagonist because CBG (5 mg/kg, i.p.) blocked the CBD- (5 mg/kg, i.p.) and
8-OH-DPAT- (0.01 mg/kg, s.c.) induced suppression of LiCl-induced gaping (Rock et al. 2011).
Furthermore, CBG (5 mg/kg, i.p.) also reversed the CBD- (5 mg/kg, i.p.) induced suppression of
LiCl-induced vomiting in house musk shrews. Therefore, it seems that CBG and CBD can both
target 5-HT1A receptors, although with opposite actions, to modulate the effects of these receptors
on nausea and vomiting.

23.5 Endocannabinoids and nausea and vomiting
Endogenously produced cannabinoids, or endocannabinoids (eCBs) have also been
shown to have antiemetic and antinausea effects. The eCBs consist of the lipid messengers
N-arachidonoylethanolamine, or anandamide (Devane et al. 1992), and 2-­arachidonoylglycerol
(2-AG) (Mechoulam et al. 1995), which are synthesized in an activity-dependent manner from
N-arachidonoyl phosphatidylethanolamine and 1, 2-diacylglycerol, respectively (Piomelli 2003).
Once released, endocannabinoids bind to metabotropic CB1 or CB2 receptors located on presynaptic axon terminals, resulting in inhibition of neurotransmitter release (Piomelli 2003), followed
by carrier-mediated transport into the postsynaptic cell and enzymatic hydrolysis (Deutsch and
Chin 1993; Di Marzo et al. 1994). Anandamide is hydrolyzed by the enzyme fatty acid amide
hydrolase (FAAH) (Cravatt et al. 1996), whereas 2-AG is degraded primarily by monoacylglycerol-­
lipase (MAGL) (Dinh et al. 2002).
23.5.1 Endocannabinoids as endogenous modulators of emesis

Much like the antiemetic and antinausea properties of synthetic and plant-based cannabinoids,
endocannabinoids also suppress emesis in a number of animal models. Administration of
exogenous anandamide has been shown to reduce toxin-induced vomiting in ferrets (Sharkey
et al. 2007; Van Sickle et al. 2005) and suppress vomiting in least shrews (Darmani 2002), along
with its stable analogue, methanandamide (Darmani 2002; Van Sickle et al. 2001). Similarly, by
prolonging the action of endogenously released anandamide, the FAAH inhibitor, URB597, has
been shown to interfere with cisplatin- and nicotine-induced vomiting in Suncus murinus (Parker
et al. 2009b), and in ferrets (Sharkey et al. 2007; Van Sickle et al. 2005). In all cases, the antiemetic
effects were blocked by a CB1 receptor antagonist/inverse agonist indicating a CB1 receptordependent mechanism of action of anandamide in suppressing vomiting. Unlike anandamide,
however, the role of 2-AG in emesis remains less clear.

Effect of Phytocannabinoids on Nausea and Vomiting

The earliest reports of exogenous 2-AG administration suggested that this particular endocannabinoid played a functionally opposite role in modulating emesis compared to that of anandamide. Specifically, Darmani and colleagues (2002) reported that administration of exogenous
2-AG alone dose-dependently (0.25–10 mg/kg, i.p.) produced vomiting among least shrews, an
effect that was blocked by the CB1 receptor antagonist/inverse agonist, rimonabant, and in a subsequent study revealed that brain 2-AG levels were increased following cisplatin-induced vomiting (Darmani et al. 2005). Interestingly, pretreatment with anandamide partially blocked the
emetic effects of 2-AG (Darmani 2002). Thus, among least shrews, 2-AG appears to be a highly
emetogenic endocannabinoid.
However, opposite effects have been reported in other animal models. Van Sickle et al. (2005)
found that a low dose of 2-AG (0.5 mg/kg, i.p.) attenuated toxin-induced vomiting in ferrets when
combined with the cannabinoid re-uptake inhibitor, VDM11, while higher doses (1–2 mg/kg, i.p.)
were capable of blocking vomiting alone (Sharkey et al. 2007; Van Sickle et al. 2005). Interestingly,
the antiemetic effects of 2-AG were reversed not only by CB1 receptor blockade, but also by a CB2
receptor antagonist (Van Sickle et al. 2005), which is particularly interesting given that the effects
of anandamide are not reversed by CB2 receptor antagonism (Van Sickle et al. 2005). More recently, Sticht et al. (2012) demonstrated similar antiemetic effects associated with increased endogenous 2-AG levels. Administration of the selective MAGL inhibitor, JZL184, dose-dependently
suppressed LiCl-induced vomiting in Suncus murinus, whereby the suppression of vomiting was
mediated through a CB1 receptor-dependent mechanism of action (Sticht et al. 2012). Although
it is unclear whether exogenous 2-AG administration leads to similar antiemetic effects in house
musk shrews, or precisely how higher doses of 2-AG modulate toxin-induced vomiting in ferrets,
the conflicting reports regarding the effects of 2-AG on vomiting may point to important species
differences in emesis.
23.5.2 Role of the endocannabinoid system in nausea

In addition to their powerful antiemetic properties, eCBs are equally effective in reducing conditioned nausea in rats. Inhibition of FAAH-mediated hydrolysis of anandamide has been shown
to suppress LiCl-induced conditioned gaping in rats, with an even greater suppressive effect upon
coadministration with exogenous anandamide (Cross-Mellor et al. 2007). Similarly, URB597 was
found to interfere with both the establishment and expression of conditioned gaping to an illnesspaired context in the rat model of anticipatory nausea (Rock et al. 2008). In either model, the
effects of anandamide on conditioned gaping were CB1 receptor mediated as pretreatment with a
CB1 receptor antagonist reversed the antinausea effects of increased anandamide levels.
The endocannabinoid, 2-AG, like anandamide, also appears to reduce nausea in rats. Specifically,
pretreatment with exogenous 2-AG was shown to dose-dependently suppress the establishment
of conditioned gaping (Sticht et al. 2012). However, unlike the antinausea effects of anandamide,
those of 2-AG do not seem to be entirely dependent on CB1 receptors since they can be reversed
by the cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitor, indomethacin (Sticht et al. 2012), but not by the CB1 or
CB2 receptor antagonists, AM-251 and AM630, respectively. Interestingly, the suppression of
conditioned gaping following concomitant pretreatment with the MAGL inhibitor, JZL184, and
exogenous 2-AG was partially reversed by a CB1 receptor antagonist (Sticht et al. 2012), suggesting that decreased 2-AG turnover reduces nausea, in part, through an action at CB1 receptors.
Nonetheless, the finding that COX inhibition blocks the antinausea effects of 2-AG serves to
highlight the dynamic nature of eCB suppression of nausea, such that 2-AG acts through several
potential mechanisms to modulate this sensation. Further research will likely clarify the precise
role of downstream eCB metabolites in the suppression of nausea.

445

446

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Whereas the antinausea effects of cannabinoids are reversed by relatively low doses of CB1
receptor antagonists/inverse agonists, higher doses alone are sufficient to produce nausea. For
example, high doses of AM251 were found to not only suppress food intake in rats, but also
induce conditioned gaping upon re-exposure to the AM251-paired taste (McLaughlin et al. 2005).
More recently, Limebeer et al. (2010) reported that compared to controls, rats pretreated with a
low dose of AM251 (2.5 mg/kg, i.p.) displayed a greater frequency of conditioned gaping upon
re-exposure to LiCl-paired saccharin, whereas rats treated with AM251 alone did not display conditioned gaping. That is, a low dose of AM251 (2.5 mg/kg, i.p.) potentiated the illness-inducing
effects of LiCl in rats, albeit without producing conditioned gaping on its own (Limebeer et al.
2010). A similar potentiation of LiCl-induced conditioned gaping was demonstrated with the CB1
receptor antagonist/inverse agonist, rimonabant, as well (Parker et al. 2003). It is important to
point out that a mere blockade of CB1 receptors is not sufficient to produce nausea on its own; the
neutral CB1 receptor antagonist, AM4113, alone did not produce conditioned gaping in rats when
paired directly with saccharin in the taste reactivity test (Sink et al. 2008), nor did the peripherally
restricted drug, AM6545, or the central/peripheral neutral receptor antagonist, AM6527, potentiate conditioned gaping either (Limebeer et al. 2010). Therefore, CB1 receptor antagonism alone is
not sufficient to produce nausea in rats, but rather inverse agonism of this receptor is associated
with malaise.
23.5.3 Endocannabinoids in human nausea and vomiting

Investigations surrounding the role of the eCB system in nausea and vomiting have typically
relied on a number of animal models, and, therefore, human data concerning eCB involvement has been rather scarce. However, recent research by Schelling and colleagues suggests
that the eCB system, indeed, acts to modulate nausea and vomiting in humans. Specifically,
Choukèr et al. (2010) reported that motion sickness corresponded with lower blood eCB
levels among participants undergoing parabolic flight maneuvers (PFs), whereas anandamide
and 2-AG levels were higher among participants who did not experience motion sickness.
Moreover, CB 1 receptor expression was reduced among participants experiencing motion
sickness compared to those unaffected by PFs, who did not show any change in CB1 receptor
expression from baseline values. Interestingly, anandamide increases were observed early on
during PFs, whereas 2-AG levels were highest following the in-flight maneuvers, suggesting
that eCBs may play different roles in reducing both motion sickness and stress induced by PFs
(Choukèr et al. 2010).

23.6 Conclusion
Only recently have the potential therapeutic benefits of phytocannabinoids, other than psychoactive Δ9-THC, been scientifically evaluated, yet the cannabis plant has been used medicinally for centuries. Here we provide evidence that several nonpsychoactive phytocannabinoids
(CBD, CBDA, THCA, and CBDV) possess therapeutic potential for the treatment of nausea
and vomiting.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank NSERC (Grant #92057) and GW Pharmaceuticals for their support of
this work, and, in particular GW Pharmaceuticals for access to several compounds that we have
evaluated in the experiments reviewed here.

Effect of Phytocannabinoids on Nausea and Vomiting

References
Ahmed, S.A., Ross, S.A., Slade, D., et al. (2008). Cannabinoid ester constituents from high-potency
Cannabis sativa. Journal of Natural Products, 71, 536–542.
Ahmedzai, S., Carlyle, D.L., Calder, I.T., and Moran, F. (1983). Anti-emetic efficacy and toxicity of
nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid, in lung cancer chemotherapy. British Journal of Cancer, 48, 657–663.
Allen, G.V., Saper, C.B., Hurley, K.M., and Cechetto, D.F. (1991). Organization of visceral and limbic
connections in the insular cortex of the rat. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 311, 1–16.
Andrews, P.L. and Horn, C.C. (2006). Signals for nausea and emesis: implications for models of upper gastrointestinal diseases. Autonomic Neuroscience: Basic & Clinical, 125, 100–15.
Aziz, Q., Schnitzler, A., and Enck, P. (2000). Functional neuroimaging of visceral sensation. Journal of
Clinical Neurophysiology, 17, 604–612.
Ballatori, E. and Roila, F. (2003). Impact of nausea and vomiting on quality of life in cancer patients during
chemotherapy. Health and Quality of Life Outcomes, 1, 46.
Berger, B.D. (1972). Conditioning of food aversions by injections of psychoactive drugs. Journal of
Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 81, 21–26.
Bernstein, I.L., Chavez, M., Allen, D., and Taylor, E.M. (1992). Area postrema mediation of physiological
and behavioral effects of lithium chloride in the rat. Brain Research, 575, 132–137.
Billig, I., Yates, B.J., and Rinaman, L. (2001). Plasma hormone levels and central c-Fos expression in
ferrets after systemic administration of cholecystokinin. American Journal of Physiology. Regulatory
Integrative and Comparative Physiology, 281, R1243–1255.
Bolognini, D, Rock, E.M., Cluny, N.L., et al. (2013). Cannabidiolic acid prevents vomiting in Suncus murinus and nausea-induced behavior in rats by enhancing 5-HT1A receptor activation. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 168, 1456–1470.
Burchfield, S.R., Elich, M.S., and Woods, S.C. (1977). Geophagia in response to stress and arthritis.
Physiology & Behavior, 19, 265–267.
Carey, M.P., Burish, T.G, and Brenner, D.E. (1983). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in cancer chemotherapy: research problems and issues. Annals of Internal Medicine, 99, 106–114.
Cascio, M.G., Gauson, L.A., Stevenson, L.A., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2010). Evidence that the
plant cannabinoid cannabigerol is a highly potent alpha2-adrenoceptor agonist and moderately potent
5HT1A receptor antagonist. British Journal of Pharmacology, 159, 129–141.
Catenoix, H., Isnard, J., Guénot, M., Petit, J., Remy, C., and Mauguière, F. (2008). The role of the anterior
insular cortex in ictal vomiting: a stereotactic electroencephalography study. Epilepsy & Behavior, 13,
560–563.
Cechetto, D.F. and Saper, C.B. (1987). Evidence for a viscerotopic sensory representation in the cortex and
thalamus in the rat. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 262, 27–45.
Chan, M.Y., Cross-Mellor, S.K., Kavaliers, M., and Ossenkopp, K.P. (2009). Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
blocks the acquisition of LiCl-induced gaping in a rodent model of anticipatory nausea. Neuroscience
Letters, 450, 301–305.
Chang, A.E., Shiling, D.J., Stillman, R.C., et al. (1979). Delata-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as an antiemetic
in cancer patients receiving high-dose methotrexate. A prospective, randomized evaluation. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 91, 819–824.
Choukèr, A., Kaufmann, I., Kreth, S., et al. (2010). Motion sickness, stress and the endocannabinoid system. PLoS One, 5, e10752.
Cluny, N.L., Naylor, R.J., Whittle, B.A., and Javid, F.A. (2008). The effects of cannabidiol and tetrahydrocannabinol on motion-induced emesis in Suncus murinus. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology,
103, 150–156.
Contreras, M., Ceric, F., and Torrealba, F. (2007). Inactivation of the interoceptive insula disrupts drug
craving and malaise induced by lithium. Science, 318, 655–658.

447

448

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Costall, B., Domeney, A.M., Naylor, R.J., and Tattersall, F.D. (1986). 5-Hydroxytryptamine M-receptor
antagonism to prevent cisplatin-induced emesis. Neuropharmacology, 25, 959–961.
Cotter, J. (2009). Efficacy of crude marijuana and synthetic delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as treatment for
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: a systematic literature review. Oncology Nursing Forum,
36, 345–352.
Crawford, S.M. and Buckman, R. (1986). Nabilone and metoclopramide in the treatment of nausea and vomiting due to cisplatinum: a double blind study. Medical Oncology and Tumor Pharmacotherapy, 3, 39–42.
Cravatt, B.F., Giang, D.K., Mayfield, S.P., Boger, D.L., Lerner, R.A., and Gilula, N.B. (1996). Molecular
characterization of an enzyme that degrades neuromodulatory fatty-acid amides. Nature, 384, 83–87.
Cross-Mellor, S.K., Ossenkopp, K.P., Piomelli, D., and Parker, L.A. (2007). Effects of the FAAH inhibitor,
URB597, and anandamide on lithium-induced taste reactivity responses: a measure of nausea in the rat.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 190, 135–143.
Cunningham, D., Bradley, C.J., Forrest, G.J., et al. (1988). A randomized trial of oral nabilone and
prochlorperazine compared to intravenous metoclopramide and dexamethasone in the treatment of
nausea and vomiting induced by chemotherapy regimens containing cisplatin or cisplatin analogues.
European Journal of Cancer & Clinical Oncology, 24, 685–689.
Dalzell, A.M., Bartlett, H., and Lilleyman, J.S. (1986). Nabilone: an alternative antiemetic for cancer chemotherapy. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 61, 502–505.
Darmani, N.A. (2001a). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol differentially suppresses cisplatin-induced emesis
and indices of motor function via cannabinoid CB1 receptors in the least shrew. Pharmacology,
Biochemistry, Behavior, 69, 239–249.
Darmani, N.A. (2001b). Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and synthetic cannabinoids prevent
emesis produced by the cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist/inverse agonist SR 141716A.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 24, 198–203.
Darmani, N.A. (2002). The potent emetogenic effects of the endocannabinoid, 2-AG (2-arachidonoylglycerol)
are blocked by delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannnabinoids. The Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 300, 34–42.
Darmani, N.A., Janoyan, J.J., Crim, J., and Ramirez, J. (2007). Receptor mechanism and antiemetic activity of structurally-diverse cannabinoids against radiation-induced emesis in the least shrew. European
Journal of Pharmacology, 563, 187–196.
Darmani, N.A. and Johnson, J.C. (2004). Central and peripheral mechanisms contribute to the antiemetic
actions of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol against 5-hydroxytryptophan-induced emesis. European
Journal of Pharmacology, 488, 201–212.
Darmani, N.A., McClanahan, B.A., Trinh, C., Petrosino, S., Valenti, M., and Di Marzo, V. (2005).
Cisplatin increases brain 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) and concomitantly reduces intestinal 2-AG and
anandamide levels in the least shrew. Neuropharmacology, 49, 502–513.
Darmani, N.A., Sim-Selley, L.J., Martin, B.R., et al. (2003). Antiemetic and motor-depressive actions of
CP55,940: cannabinoid CB1 receptor characterization, distribution, and G-protein activation. European
Journal of Pharmacology, 459, 83–95.
De Boer-Dennert, M., de Wit, R., Schmitz, P.I., et al. (1997). Patient perceptions of the side-effects of
chemotherapy: the influence of 5HT3 antagonists. British Journal of Cancer, 76, 1055–1061.
Deiana, S., Watanabe, A., Yamasaki, Y., et al. (2012). Plasma and brain pharmacokinetic profile of cannabidiol (CBD), cannabidivarine (CBDV), Delta-tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV) and cannabigerol
(CBG) in rats and mice following oral and intraperitoneal administration and CBD action on obsessivecompulsive behaviour. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 219, 859–873.
Deutsch, D.G. and Chin, S.A. (1993). Enzymatic synthesis and degradation of anandamide, a cannabinoid
receptor agonist. Biochemical Pharmacology, 46, 791–796.
Devane, W.A., Hanus, L., Breuer, A., et al. (1992). Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds
to the cannabinoid receptor. Science (New York, N.Y.), 258, 1946–199.

Effect of Phytocannabinoids on Nausea and Vomiting

Di Marzo, V., Fontana, A., Cadas, H., et al. (1994). Formation and inactivation of endogenous cannabinoid anandamide in central neurons. Nature, 372, 686–691.
Dinh, T.P., Freund, T.F., and Piomelli, D. (2002). A role for monoglyceride lipase in 2-arachidonoylglycerol
inactivation. Chemistry and Physics of Lipids, 121, 149–158.
Duran, M., Pérez, E., Abanades, S., et al. (2010). Preliminary efficacy and safety of an oromucosal standardized cannabis extract in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. British Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 70, 656–663.
Ekert, H., Waters, K.D., Jurk, I.H., Mobilia, J., and Loughnan, P. (1979). Amelioration of cancer
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting by delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. The Medical Journal of
Australia, 2, 657–659.
Fiol, M.E., Leppik, I.E., Mireles, R., and Maxwell, R. (1988). Ictus emeticus and the insular cortex. Epilepsy
Research, 2, 127–131.
Foubert, J. and Vaessen, G. (2005). Nausea: the neglected symptom? European Journal of Oncology Nursing,
9, 21–32.
Frytak, S., Moertel, C.G., O’Fallon, J.R., et al. (1979). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as an antiemetic for
patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. A comparison with prochlorperazine and a placebo. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 91, 825–830.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964a). Isolation, structure, and partial synthesis of an active constituent of
hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86, 1646–1647.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964b). The structure and synthesis of cannabigerol, a new hashish constituent. Proceedings of Chemical Society, 82.
Garcia, J., Hankins, W.G., and Rusiniak, K.W. (1974). Behavioral regulation of the milieu interne in man
and rat. Science, 185, 824–831.
Gill, E.W., Paton, W.D.M., and Pertwee, R.G. (1970). Preliminary experiments on the chemistry and pharmacology of cannabis. Nature, 228, 134–136.
Grill, H.J. and Norgren, R. (1978). The taste reactivity test. I. Mimetic responses to gustatory stimuli in
neurologically normal rats. Brain Research, 143, 263–279.
Grunberg, S.M., Deuson, R.R., Mavros, P., et al. (2004). Incidence of chemotherapy-induced nausea and
emesis after modern antiemetics. Cancer, 100(10), 2261–2268.
Grunfeld, Y. and Edery, H. (1969). Psychopharmacological activity of the active constituents of hashish
and some related cannabinoids. Psychopharmacologia, 14, 200–210.
Gylys, J.A., Doran, K.M., and Buyniski, P.J. (1979) Antagonism of cisplatin induced emesis in the dog.
Research Communications in Chemical Pathology and Pharmacology, 23, 61–68.
Hanus, L.O., and Mechoulam, R. (2005). Cannabinoid chemistry: an overview. In: R. Mechoulam (ed.)
Cannabinoids as Therapeutics. Basel: Birkhäuser, pp. 23–46.
Haring, M., Marsicano, G., Lutz, B., and Monory, K. (2007). Identification of the cannabinoid receptor
type 1 in serotonergic cells of raphe nuclei in mice. Neuroscience, 146, 1212–1219.
Herman, T.S., Einhorn, L.H., Jones, S.E., et al. (1979). Superiority of nabilone over prochlorperazine as
an antiemetic in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. The New England Journal of Medicine, 300,
1295–1297.
Hesketh, P.J., Van Belle, S., Aapro, M., et al. (2003). Differential involvement of neurotransmitters through
the time course of cisplatin-induced emesis as revealed by therapy with specific receptor antagonists.
European Journal of Cancer, 39, 1074–1080.
Hickok, J.T., Roscoe, J.A., Morrow, G.R., King, D.K., Atkins, J.N., and Fitch, T.R. (2003). Nausea and
emesis remain significant problems of chemotherapy despite prophylaxis with 5-hydroxytryptamine-3
antiemetics: a university of Rochester James P. Wilmot cancer center community clinical oncology program study of 360 cancer patients treated in the community. Cancer, 97, 2880–2886.
Hillsley, K. and Grundy, D. (1998). Serotonin and cholecystokinin activate different populations of rat
mesenteric vagal afferents. Neuroscience Letters, 255, 63–66.

449

450

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Hollister, L.E. (1974). Structure-activity relationships in man of cannabis constituents, and homologs and
metabolites of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Pharmacology, 11, 3–11.
Horn, C.C. (2008). Why is the neurobiology of nausea and vomiting so important? Appetite, 50, 430–434.
Hornby, P.J. (2001). Central neurocircuitry associated with emesis. The American Journal of Medicine, 111,
106S–12S.
Howlett, A.C., Barth, F., Bonner, T.I., et al. (2002). International Union of Pharmacology. XXVII.
Classification of cannabinoid receptors. Pharmacological Reviews, 54, 161–202.
Iversen, L.L. (2008). The Science of Marijuana. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
Jordan, K., Grothey, A., Kegel, T., Fibich, C., and Schöbert, C. (2005). Antiemetic efficacy of an oral suspension of granisetron plus dexamethasone and influence of quality of life on risk for nausea and vomiting. Onkologie, 28, 88–92.
Kaada, B.R. (1951). Somato-motor, autonomic and electrocorticographic responses to electrical stimulation
of rhinencephalic and other structures in primates, cat, and dog; a study of responses from the limbic,
subcallosal, orbito-insular, piriform and temporal cortex, hippocampus-fornix and amygdala. Acta
Physiologica Scandinavica Supplementum, 24, 1–262.
Kiefer, S.W. and Orr, M.R. (1992). Taste avoidance, but not aversion, learning in rats lacking gustatory cortex. Behavioral Neuroscience, 106, 140–146.
Klumpers, L.E., Beumer, T.L., van Hasselt, J.G., et al. (2012). Novel Δ(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol formulation Namisol has beneficial pharmacokinetics and promising pharmacodynamic effects. British Journal
of Clinical Pharmacology, 74, 42–53.
Kwiatkowska, M., Parker, L.A., Burton, P., and Mechoulam, R. (2004). A comparative analysis of the
potential of cannabinoids and ondansetron to suppress cisplatin-induced emesis in the Suncus murinus
(house musk shrew). Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 174, 254–259.
Lane, M., Vogel, C.L., Ferguson, J., et al. (1991). Dronabinol and prochlorperazine in combination
for treatment of cancer chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Journal of Pain and Symptom
Management, 6, 352–359.
Liau, C.T., Chu, N.M., Liu, H.E., Deuson, R., Lien, J., and Chen, J.S. (2005). Incidence of chemotherapyinduced nausea and vomiting in Taiwan: physicians’ and nurses’ estimation vs. patients’ reported outcomes. Supportive Care in Cancer, 13, 277–286.
Liu, Y.L., Malik, N., Sanger, G.J., Friedan, M.I., and Andrews, P.L. (2005). Pica--a model of nausea?
Species differences in response to cisplatin. Physiology & Behavior, 85, 271–217.
Limebeer, C.L., Hall, G., and Parker, L.A. (2006). Exposure to a lithium-paired context elicits gaping in
rats: a model of anticipatory nausea. Physiology & Behavior, 88, 398–403.
Limebeer, C.L., Krohn, J.P., Cross-Mellor, S., Litt, D.E., Ossenkopp, K.P., and Parker, L.A. (2008).
Exposure to a context previously associated with nausea elicits conditioned gaping in rats: a model of
anticipatory nausea. Behavioural Brain Research, 187, 33–40.
Limebeer, C.L. and Parker, L.A. (1999). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol interferes with the establishment
and the expression of conditioned rejection reactions produced by cyclophosphamide: a rat model of
nausea. Neuroreport, 10, 3769–3772.
Limebeer, C.L. and Parker, L.A. (2000). The antiemetic drug ondansetron interferes with lithium-induced
conditioned rejection reactions, but not lithium-induced taste avoidance in rats. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Animal Behavior Processes, 26, 371–384.
Limebeer, C.L, Rock, E.M., Mechoulam, R., and Parker, L.A. (2012). The anti-nausea effects of CB1
agonists are mediated by an action at the visceral insular cortex. British Journal of Pharmacology, 167,
1126–1136.
Limebeer, C.L., Vemuri, V.K., Bedard, H., et al. (2010). Inverse agonism of cannabinoid CB1 receptors potentiates LiCl-induced nausea in the conditioned gaping model in rats. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 161, 336–349.

®

Effect of Phytocannabinoids on Nausea and Vomiting

London, S. W., McCarthy, L. E., and Borison, H. L. (1979). Suppression of cancer chemotherapy-induced
vomiting in the cat by nabilone, a synthetic cannabinoid. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental
Biology and Medicine, 160, 437–440.
Lundy, R.F. Jr. and Norgren, R. (2004). Activity in the hypothalamus, amygdala, and cortex generates
bilateral and convergent modulation of pontine gustatory neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 91,
1143–1157.
McCarthy, L.E. and Borison, H.L. (1981). Antiemetic activity of N-methyllevonantradol and nabilone in
cisplatin-treated cats. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 30S–37S.
McLaughlin, P.J., Winston, K.M., Limebeer, C.L., Parker, L.A., Makriyannis, A., and Salamone, J.D.
(2005). The cannabinoid CB1 antagonist AM 251 produces food avoidance and behaviors associated
with nausea but does not impair feeding efficiency in rats. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 180, 286–293.
Mechoulam, R. (2007). Plant cannabinoids: a neglected pharamcological treasure trove. British Journal of
Pharamcology, 146, 913–915.
Mechoulam, R. and Hanus, L. (2002). Cannabidiol: an overview of some chemical and pharmacological
aspects. Part I: chemical aspects. Chemistry and Physics of Lipids, 121, 35–43.
Mechoulam, R., Ben-Shabat, S., Hanus, L., et al. (1995). Identification of an endogenous 2-monoglyceride,
present in canine gut, that binds to cannabinoid receptors. Biochemical Pharmacology, 50, 83–90.
Mechoulam, R., Shani, A., Edery, H., and Grunfeld, Y. (1970). Chemical basis of hashish activity. Science,
169, 611–612.
Meiri, E., Jhangiani, H., Vredenburgh, J.J., et al. (2007). Efficacy of dronabinol alone and in combination
with ondansetron versus ondansetron alone for delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.
Current Medical Research and Opinion, 23, 533–543.
Merkus, F.W. (1971). Cannabivarin and tetrahydrocannabivarin, two new constituents of hashish. Nature.
232, 579–580.
Miner W.D., and Sanger, G.J. (1986). Inhibition of cisplatin-induced vomiting by selective 5-hydroxytryptamine
M-receptor antagonism. British Journal of Pharmacology, 88, 497–499.
Mitchell, D., Wells, C., Hoch, N., Lind, K., Woods, S.C., and Mitchell, L.K. (1976). Poison induced pica in
rats. Physiology & Behavior, 17, 691–697.
Morrow, G.R. and Dobkin, P.L. (1988). Behavioral approaches for the management of aversive side effects
of cancer treatment. Psychiatric Medicine, 5, 299–314.
Nesse, R.M., Carli, T., Curtis, G.C., and Kleinman P.D. (1980). Pretreatment nausea in cancer chemotherapy: a conditioned response? Psychosomatic Medicine, 42, 33–36.
O’Brien, L.D., Wills, K.L., Segsworth, B., et al. (2012). Effect of chronic exposure to rimonabant and
phytocannabinoids on anxiety-like behavior and saccharin palatability. Pharmacology, Biochemistry,
Behavior, 103, 597–602
Orr, L.E. and McKernan, J.F. (1981). Antiemetic effect of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in chemotherapyassociated nausea and emesis as compared to placebo and compazine. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology,
21, 76S–80S.
Orr, L.E., McKernan, J.F., and Bloome, B. (1980). Antiemetic effect of tetrahydrocannabinol. Compared
with placebo and prochlorperazine in chemotherapy-associated nausea and emesis. Archives of Internal
Medicine, 140, 1431–1433.
Parker, L.A. (1995). Rewarding drugs produce taste avoidance, but not taste aversion. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 19, 143–157.
Parker, L.A., Hills, K., and Jensen, K. (1984). Behavioral CRs elicited by a lithium- or an amphetaminepaired contextual test chamber. Animal Learning & Behavior, 12, 307–315.
Parker, L.A. and Kemp, S.W. (2001). Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) interferes with conditioned retching
in Suncus murinus: an animal model of anticipatory nausea and vomiting (ANV). Neuroreport, 12,
749–751.

451

452

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Parker, L.A., Kwiatkowska, M., Burton, P., and Mechoulam, R. (2004). Effect of cannabinoids on lithiuminduced vomiting in the Suncus murinus (house musk shrew). Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 171, 156–161.
Parker, L.A., Kwiatkowska, M., and Mechoulam, R. (2006). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol, but not ondansetron, interfere with conditioned retching reactions elicited by a lithium-paired context in Suncus murinus: an animal model of anticipatory nausea and vomiting. Physiology & Behavior,
87, 66–71.
Parker, L.A., Limebeer, C.L., and Rana, S.A. (2009a). Conditioned disgust, but not conditioned taste
avoidance, may reflect conditioned nausea in rats. In: S. Reilly and T.R. Schachtman (eds.). Conditioned
Taste Aversions: Behavioral and Neural Processes. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 92–113.
Parker, L.A., Limebeer, C.L., Rock, E.M., Litt, D.L., Kwiatkowska, M., and Piomelli, D. (2009b). The
FAAH inhibitor URB-597 interferes with cisplatin- and nicotine-induced vomiting in the Suncus murinus (house musk shrew). Physiology & Behavior, 97, 121–124.
Parker, L.A. and Mechoulam, R. (2003). Cannabinoid agonists and antagonists modulate lithium-induced
conditioned gaping in rats. Integrative Physiological and Behavioral Science, 38, 133–145.
Parker, L.A., Mechoulam, R., and Schlievert, C. (2002). Cannabidiol, a non-psychoactive component of
cannabis and its synthetic dimethylheptyl homolog suppress nausea in an experimental model with rats.
Neuroreport 13, 567–570.
Parker, L.A., Mechoulam, R., Schlievert, C., Abbott, L., Fudge, M.L., and Burton, P. (2003). Effects
of cannabinoids on lithium-induced conditioned rejection reactions in a rat model of nausea.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 166, 156–162.
Parker, L.A., Rana, S.A., and Limebeer, C.L. (2008). Conditioned nausea in rats: assessment by conditioned disgust reactions, rather than conditioned taste avoidance. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 62, 198–209.
Parker, L.A., Rock, E.M., and Limebeer, C.L. (2011). Regulation of nausea and vomiting by cannabinoids.
British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1411–1422.
Penfield, W. and Faulk, M.E. (1955). The insula; further observations on its function. Brain, 78, 445–470.
Pertwee, R.G. (2009). Emerging strategies for exploiting cannabinoid receptor agonists as medicines. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 156, 397–411.
Pertwee, R.G., Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A., et al. (2007). The psychoactive plant cannabinoid, Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol, is antagonized by Delta8- and Delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin in mice in vivo.
British Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 586–594.
Piomelli, D. (2003). The molecular logic of endocannabinoid signalling. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 4,
873–884.
Poli-Bigelli, S., Rodrigues-Pereira, J., Carides, A.D., et al. (2003). Addition of the neurokinin 1 receptor
antagonist aprepitant to standard antiemetic therapy improves control of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Results from a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in Latin America.
Cancer, 97, 3090–3098.
Pomeroy, M., Fennelly, J.J., and Towers, M. (1986). Prospective randomized double-blind trial of
nabilone versus domperidone in the treatment of cytotoxic-induced emesis. Cancer Chemotherapy and
Pharmacology, 17, 285–288.
Riedel, G., Fadda, P., McKillop-Smith, S., Pertwee, R.G., Platt, B., and Robinson, L. (2009). Synthetic and
plant-derived cannabinoid receptor antagonists show hypophagic properties in fasted and non-fasted
mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 156, 1154–1166.
Rock, E.M and Parker, L.A. (2013). Effect of low doses of cannabidiolic acid and ondansetron on
LiCl-induced conditioned gaping (a model of nausea-induced behaviour) in rats. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 169, 685–92.
Rock, E.M., Bolognini, D., Limebeer, C.L., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol, a non-psychotropic component of
cannabis, attenuates vomiting and nausea-like behaviour via indirect agonism of 5-HT(1A) somatodendritic autoreceptors in the dorsal raphe nucleus. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165, 2620–2634.

Effect of Phytocannabinoids on Nausea and Vomiting

Rock, E.M., Goodwin, J.M., Limebeer, C.L., et al. (2011). Interaction between non-psychotropic cannabinoids in marihuana: effect of cannabigerol (CBG) on the anti-nausea or anti-emetic effects of cannabidiol (CBD) in rats and shrews. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 215, 505–512.
Rock, E.M., Kopstick, R.L., Limebeer, C.L., Parker, L.A. (2013a). Tetrahydrocannabinolic acid reduces
nausea-induced conditioned nausea in rats and vomiting in Suncus murinus. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 170(3), 641–648.
Rock, E.M., Limebeer, C.L., Mechoulam, R., Piomelli, D., and Parker, L.A. (2008). The effect of cannabidiol and URB597 on conditioned gaping (a model of nausea) elicited by a lithium-paired context in
the rat. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 196, 389–395.
Rock, E.M., Sticht, M.A., Duncan, M. Stott, C., and Parker, L.A. (2013b). Evaluation of the potential
of the phytocannabinoids, cannabidivarin (CBDV) and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin (THVC), to produce CB1 receptor inverse agonism symptoms of nausea in rats. British Journal of Pharmacology, 170,
671–678.
Rudd, J.A., Ngan, M.P., and Wai, M.K. (1998). 5-HT3 receptors are not involved in conditioned taste aversions induced by 5-hydroxytryptamine, ipecacuanha or cisplatin. European Journal of Pharmacology,
352, 143–149.
Rudd, J.A., Yamamoto, K., Yamatodani, A., and Takeda, N. (2002). Differential action of ondansetron
and dexamethasone to modify cisplatin-induced acute and delayed kaolin consumption (“pica”) in rats.
European Journal of Pharmacology, 454, 47–52.
Sallan, S.E., Zinberg, N.E., and Frei, E., 3rd. (1975). Antiemetic effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in
patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. New England Journal of Medicine, 293, 795–797.
Saper, C.B. (2004). Organization of cerebral cortical afferent systems in the rat. II. Magnocellular basal
nucleus. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 222, 313–342.
Schlicker, E. and Kathmann, M. (2001). Modulation of transmitter release via presynaptic cannabinoid
receptors. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 22, 565–572.
Shannon, H.E., Martin, W.R., and Silcox, D. (1978) Lack of antiemetic effect of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol
in apomorophine-induced emesis in the dog. Life Sciences, 23, 49–53.
Sharkey, K.A., Cristino, L., Oland, L.D., et al. (2007). Arvanil, anandamide and N-arachidonoyl-dopamine
(NADA) inhibit emesis through cannabinoid CB1 and vanilloid TRPV1 receptors in the ferret. The
European Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 2773–2782.
Sink, K.S., McLaughlin, P.J., Wood, J.A., et al. (2008). The novel cannabinoid CB1 receptor neutral antagonist AM4113 suppresses food intake and food-reinforced behavior but does not induce signs of nausea
in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology, 33, 946–955.
Steele, N., Gralla, R.J., Braun, D.W.Jr., and Young, C.W. (1980). Double-blind comparison of the
antiemetic effects of nabilone and prochlorperazine on chemotherapy-induced emesis. Cancer
Treatment Reports, 64, 219–224.
Stern, R.M., Koch, K.L., and Andrews, P.L.R. (2011). Nausea: Mechanisms and Management. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Sticht, M.A., Long, J.Z., Rock, E.M., et al. (2012). Inhibition of monoacylglycerol lipase attenuates
vomiting in Suncus murinus and 2-arachidonoyl glycerol attenuates nausea in rats. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 165, 2425–2435.
Sweet, D.L., Miller, N.J., Weddington, W., Senay, E., and Sushelsky, L. (1981). Delta
9-Tetrahydrocannabinol as an antiemetic for patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. A pilot study.
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 70S–75S.
Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A., Wease, K.N., et al. (2005). Evidence that the plant cannabinoid Delta9tetrahydrocannabivarin is a cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptor antagonist. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 146, 917–926.
Torii, Y., Saito, H., and Matsuki, N. (1991). 5-Hydroxytryptamine is emetogenic in the house musk shrew,
Suncus murinus. Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Archives of Pharmacology, 344, 564–567.

453

454

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Tramèr, M.R., Carroll, D., Campbell, F.A., Reynolds, D.J., Moore, R.A., and McQuay, H.J. (2001).
Cannabinoids for control of chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting: quantitative systematic
review. British Medical Journal (Clinical Research ed.), 323, 16–21.
Tuerke, K.J., Limebeer, C.L., Fletcher, P.J., and Parker, L.A. (2012a). Double dissociation between regulation of conditioned disgust and taste avoidance by serotonin availability at the 5-HT3 receptor in the
posterior and anterior insular cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience, 32, 13709–13717.
Tuerke, K.J., Winters, B.D., and Parker, L.A. (2012b). Ondansetron interferes with unconditioned lyingon belly and acquisition of conditioned gaping induced by LiCl as models of nausea-induced behaviors
in rats. Physiology & Behavior, 105, 856–860.
Ungerleider, J.T., Andrysiak, T.A., Fairbanks, L.A., Tesler, A.S., and Parker, R.G. (1984).
Tetrahydrocannabinol vs. prochlorperazine. The effects of two antiemetics on patients undergoing
radiotherapy. Radiology, 150, 598–599.
Van Belle, S., Lichinitser, M.R., Navari, R.M., et al. (2002). Prevention of cisplatin-induced acute and
delayed emesis by the selective neurokinin-1 antagonists, L-758,298 and MK-869. Cancer, 94, 3032–3041.
Van Sickle, M.D., Duncan, M., Kingsley, P.J., et al. (2005). Identification and functional characterization
of brainstem cannabinoid CB2 receptors. Science, 310, 329–332.
Van Sickle, M.D., Oland, L.D., Ho, W., et al. (2001). Cannabinoids inhibit emesis through CB1 receptors
in the brainstem of the ferret. Gastroenterology, 121,767–774.
Van Sickle, M.D., Oland, L.D., Mackie, K., Davison, J.S., and Sharkey, K.A. (2003). Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol selectively acts on CB1 receptors in specific regions of dorsal vagal complex to
inhibit emesis in ferrets. American Journal of Physiology. Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 285,
G566–G576.
Vera, G., Chiarlone, A., Cabezos, P.A., Pascual. D., Martin, M.I., and Abalo, R. (2007). WIN 55,212-2
prevents mechanical allodynia but not alterations in feeding behaviour induced by chronic cisplatin in
the rat. Life Sciences, 81, 467–479.
Verhoeckx, K.C., Korthout, H.A., van Meeteren-Kreikamp, A.P., et al. (2006). Unheated Cannabis sativa
extracts and its major compound THC-acid have potential immuno-modulating properties not mediated by CB1 and CB2 receptor coupled pathways. International Immunopharmacology, 6, 656–665.
Wang, Y., Ray, A.P., McClanahan, B.A., and Darmani, N.A. (2009). The antiemetic interaction of
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol when combined with tropisetron or dexamethaone in the least shrew.
Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 91, 367–373.
Yamamoto, K., Ngan, M.P., Takeda, N., Yamatodani, A., and Rudd, J.A. (2004). Differential activity of
drugs to induce emesis and pica behavior in Suncus murinus (house musk shrew) and rats. Physiology &
Behavior, 83, 151–156.

Chapter 24

Established and Emerging Concepts
of Cannabinoid Action on Food Intake
and their Potential Application to the
Treatment of Anorexia and Cachexia
Luigia Cristino and Vincenzo Di Marzo

24.1 A little bit of history: cannabis, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol,

and appetite
The capability of cannabis preparations to stimulate appetite, especially for palatable foods, has
been documented as far back as 300 ad (Chopra and Chopra 1939). Therefore, it is surprising
that, in modern times and when it was understood that this orexigenic action of cannabis was
mainly due to its major psychotropic constituent, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC), this wellknown phenomenon has been only sparsely supported by empirical evidence, with few detailed
human studies and even fewer well-controlled investigations in experimental models. In an early
report, Hollister (1971) demonstrated that a single oral dose of marijuana (containing 0.35 mg/
kg Δ9-THC) increased the intake of milkshakes in healthy unfasted volunteers. Foltin and colleagues showed that subjects given marijuana cigarettes (containing 1.84% w/w Δ9-THC) showed
a marked increase in food intake (1500 kcal), primarily attributable to an increase in “snack” food
consumption (Foltin et al. 1986, 1988). In animals, the ﬁrst full dose–response analysis of Δ9-THCinduced hyperphagia was documented in the late 1990s (Williams et al. 1998); a range of Δ9-THC
doses were administered orally to satiated rats and hyperphagia was seen at doses of 0.5 mg/kg and
above. Later, the hyperphagic action of Δ9-THC was shown to: (1) be mediated by stimulation of
type 1 cannabinoid receptors (CB1) (see section 24.2), which are widely distributed throughout the
brain (Beal et al. 1997; Herkenham et al. 1990), as this effect was blocked by administration of the
selective CB1 receptor antagonist, N-piperidino-5-(4-chlorophenyl)-1-(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-4methylpyrazole-3-carboxamide (SR141716, or rimonabant), which is effective against other effects
of Δ9-THC also in human volunteers (Huestis et al. 2001); and (2) occur through a marked reduction in the latency to begin a new meal (Williams and Kirkham 2002a, 2002b). In agreement with
Foltin’s human study, the action of the drug was stronger when rats were fed a palatable, high-fat
diet (HFD) (Koch 2001). Together with an apparently preferential suppression of palatable ingesta
in animals by the CB1 antagonist rimonabant, when administered alone, observed in the studies
by Arnone et al. (1997) and Simiand et al. (1998), these data led to the initial hypothesis that CB1
receptor activation by Δ9-THC may promote feeding by amplifying the incentive or rewarding
value of food. Indeed, CB1 involvement in general reward processes is supported by a number of
different studies showing, for example, that rimonabant reduces the sensitivity of rats to rewarding electrical brain stimulation (Deroche-Gamonet et al. 2001), and prevents the acquisition of

456

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

drug- or food-induced place preferences (Chaperon et al. 1998). Nevertheless, given the paucity
of data in humans, it is possible that CB1-induced hyperphagia may involve also other aspects of
feeding regulation. For example, it may result from the inhibition of any of the satiety signals that
have been proposed to regulate appetite (Clapham et al. 2001) (see section 24.2).
Therapeutically, appetite stimulation by Δ9-THC and cannabis has been studied for several decades, particularly in relation to the cachexia associated with cancer, acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS), and anorexia nervosa. Cachexia is a term derived from Greek kakos, meaning
bad, and hexis, meaning condition, and describes the progressive loss of adipose tissue and lean
body mass subsequent of several chronic wasting disorders. Increased proteolysis, decreased protein synthesis, and accelerated lipolysis due to high energy demands all contribute to a dramatic
decline in lean body mass and fat mass and increased mortality in this setting (O’Gorman et al.
2000; Tisdale 2009). Anorexia, instead, is defined as the loss of the desire to eat despite caloric
deprivation, and, apart from anorexia nervosa, is also frequently seen in patients with advanced
chronic illness (Walsh et al. 2000). Caloric restriction per se induces a less severe degree of weight
loss and a different metabolic pattern from cachexia, being characterized by decreased energy
expenditure and preservation of lean at the expense of fat mass. This indicates that anorexia alone
does not cause the extreme weight loss seen in cachexia. Accordingly, nutritional support is not
sufficient to reverse this latter condition (Tisdale 2002).
Synthetic Δ9-THC (dronabinol) has been used in the clinic for a number of years to combat a
reduction in appetite and consequent weight reduction and wasting, as observed in conditions
that can significantly affect appetite and alter psychological responses to food and eating, such
as AIDS, cancer, and related drug or radiation treatments (Kirkham 2005; Mechoulam et al.
1998). In a pilot study, dronabinol caused weight gain in the majority of subjects (Plasse 1991). A
relatively low oral dose of dronabinol, 2.5 mg twice daily, enhanced appetite and stabilized body
weight in patients with AIDS suffering from anorexia (Beal et al. 1997) for at least 7 months.
Interestingly, in a pilot double-blind study conducted in AIDS patients with HIV-associated
neuropathic pain, compared to placebo, cannabis administration was associated with significant
increases in plasma levels of the orexigenic hormones, ghrelin and leptin (see section 24.2), and
decreases in the levels of the anorectic mediator, peptide YY (PYY), with no influence on insulin
levels (Riggs et al. 2012). In another study on patients with AIDS, however, no weight gain was
reported over the course of 12 weeks of dronabinol administration (2.5 mg twice a day), whereas
a dose of 750 mg/day of megestrol acetate (a synthetic progestational drug) produced significant
weight gain (Timpone et al. 1999). In a more recent study, carried out with 243 patients with
cancer-related cachexia, treated twice daily with either placebo, a cannabis extract or Δ9-THC (in
both latter cases the dose of this cannabinoid was 2.5 mg), again no difference in patient appetite
or quality of life assessment was found among groups, although both the extract and the pure
compound were very well tolerated (Strasser et al. 2006). Nevertheless, treatments with Δ9-THC
or its synthetic derivative, nabilone, devised in a way that higher, more effective and otherwise
not tolerated doses of these compounds could be used (see later), may still have benefits, and
beyond mere stimulation of appetite. Patients may lose enjoyment of, or interest in, food due to
changes in taste perception produced by chemotherapy or through the acquisition of conditioned
taste aversions following the nausea or vomiting accompanying many radical treatments. Indeed,
wasting in the elderly is accompanied by decreased taste and smell acuity, whereas, in subjects
with dementia, these factors are aggravated by the inability of patients to feed themselves, or even
by food refusal. Cannabinoid preparations that stimulate appetite by enhancing the attractiveness
and enjoyment of food, or reduce the negative effects of other therapeutic interventions on feeding behaviors, may be beneficial under these circumstances.

CANNABINOIDS AND APPETITE REGULATION

Indeed, cannabis has long been known to possess antiemetic properties (Loewe 1946;
O’Shaugnessy 1843), and Δ9-THC was shown to exert antinausea and antiemetic effects in the
1970s, that is, even before CB1 receptors were discovered and found to be widely expressed in the
brainstem dorsal vagal complex associated with the triggering of emetic responses (Herkenham
et al. 1990; McCarthy and Borison 1984; Van Sickle et al. 2001). In particular, cannabinoids may
be useful as pretreatments to avoid the establishment of conditioned nausea and anticipatory
emesis associated with chemotherapy (Andrykowski 1988; Morrow et al. 1996). Patients who
experience nausea or vomiting with chemotherapy treatments often experience anticipatory,
conditioned retching or nausea that impairs their ability to tolerate subsequent medication as
well as to feed properly. In animal models, Δ9-THC and the potent CB1 receptor agonist HU210
can prevent conditioned rejection (disgust) responses to flavors, usually associated with illness or
the corresponding drug treatments (Limebeer and Parker 1999; Parker et al. 2004). A complicating issue, however, is the association of cannabinoid therapy with side effects, most commonly
euphoria, sedation, dizziness, and ataxia. It is likely that these unwanted effects may be attenuated by improved formulations, or by coadministration with other cannabinoids that allow for
self-titration of Δ9-THC up to more efficacious and still well-tolerated doses. This strategy is
used for Sativex®, which contains, in the form of a botanical extract administered as oromucosal
spray, an approximately 1:1 ratio of Δ9-THC and cannabidiol (CBD). CBD is an abundant and
nonpsychotropic plant cannabinoid, which can counteract some of the central unwanted effects of
Δ9-THC (Russo 2011). On the other hand, the euphoric effects of cannabinoids are not always an
obstacle to their effective administration. Mood elevation, or even actual antidepressant actions of
chronic Δ9-THC, may be an important component of its effectiveness in patients with cancer or
AIDS. Alternatively, it may be possible to use cannabinoids that lack the psychotropic potency of
Δ9-THC. For example, a nonpsychotropic, CB1-inactive, synthetic cannabinoid, HU-211, was
found to provide almost complete protection against emesis produced by one of the most emetogenic cytotoxins, cisplatin (Feigenbaum et al. 1989). Additionally, the earlier mentioned CBD
prevents nausea induced by lithium chloride or conditioned nausea elicited by a flavor paired with
the toxin in rats (Parker et al. 2002).

24.2 The endocannabinoid system in food intake: regulation

of appetite and reward
Investigations into the biological bases of the multiple effects of cannabis have yielded important breakthroughs in recent years: the discovery of two cannabinoid receptors in the brain and
peripheral organs, and of endogenous ligands (endocannabinoids) for these receptors. These
recent advances in cannabinoid pharmacology may lead to improved treatments for cachexia
and/or anorexia conditions or, conversely, for combating excessive appetite and body weight, for
example, by using CB1 receptor antagonists as antiobesity medications.
The endocannabinoid system (ECS) is composed of two Gi/o protein-coupled receptors for
Δ9-THC, known as “cannabinoid” receptor types 1 (CB 1) and 2 (CB2), their lipid ligands (i.e.,
the endocannabinoids, ECs), and the enzymatic machinery for EC (endocannabinoid) synthesis
and degradation. The most studied ECs, N-arachidonoyl-ethanolamide (anandamide, AEA)
and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), are produced from cell membrane phospholipids following cell stimulation, before being released by cells to target CB1 and CB2 receptors (reviewed in
Di Marzo 2011). Within the central nervous system, ECs, and 2-AG in particular, usually signal
in a retrograde manner, i.e., they are produced, at least to some extent, by postsynaptic neurons
and act on CB1 in presynaptic terminals to inhibit excitatory or inhibitory neurotransmitter

457

458

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

dopamine release
and
μ-opioid activity
CB1
hyperphagic
activity

Mesolimbic
system

inhibitory
synapse

Forebrain
CB1
hypophagic
activity

GABA

EC

CB1
hyperphagic
activity

EC

Ventral tegmental area
CB1
hypophagic
activity

dopamine

EC

glut.

dopamine release
excitatoty
synapse

glut.

hypothalamic
2-AG

excitatoty
synapse
hypothalamic
2-AG

leptin
Hypothalamus

lateral hypothalamus
inhibitory
synapse

CB1
hyperphagic
activity

MCH

CB1
hypophagic
activity

orexin

EC

EC

ventral
tegmental area
endocannabinoids

Adipose
tissue

GABA

glut.

insulin

excitatoty
synapse
CB1
hyperphagic
activity

ghrelin

paraventricualr nucleus
excitatoty
synapse
CRH

paravocellular
neurons

EC

glut.

Stomach

Pancreas

Fig. 24.1 Local effects of endocannabinoids and CB1 receptors on the neural mechanisms regulating
food intake from either the homeostatic or hedonic standpoint, and their regulation by peripheral
hormones.

release. EC release is believed to occur immediately after biosynthesis from phospholipid precursors, with no intermediate storage in vesicles. Within a neuronal network,
EC “tone” is the result not only of the expression and functional coupling to G-proteins
of CB 1 and CB 2 receptors, but also of the regulation of EC levels as determined by different enzymatic biosynthetic and catabolic cascades (reviewed in Kano et al. 2009). Thus, ECs

CANNABINOIDS AND APPETITE REGULATION

are ideal mediators for responding in real-time to the ever changing feeding state of an organism.
They regulate appetite and food intake in a local manner, by modulating, via activation of CB1
receptors, the activity of hypothalamic neurons, and subsequently the release of orexigenic and
anorexigenic neuropeptides, as well as the function of mesolimbic and brainstem neurons, and
by translating input information from peripherally derived hormones, such as leptin, ghrelin, and
glucocorticoids, to these neurons. Thus, ECs regulate energy balance and food intake by affecting
basal functions, including the hedonic evaluation of foods at the mesolimbic level, and integrative
functions both at central (hypothalamus and hindbrain) and peripheral (intestinal system and
adipose tissue) levels (Fig. 24.1).
24.2.1 ECs, CB1, and the homeostatic regulation of food intake

The hypothalamus plays a key role in integrating the multiple biochemical and behavioral components of feeding and weight regulation. It is the most extensively interconnected area of the
brain, and through its wide web of neural circuits it controls a variety of essential autonomic
and somatomotor functions. Neuroanatomical studies have demonstrated direct projections to
and from hypothalamic areas of several brain regions, e.g., cortical/limbic areas and the autonomic and motor system of the brainstem. Such extensive connectivity is thought to represent
the anatomical basis supporting sleep–wake regulation, energy homeostasis, and cognitive and
reward-related functions (Morton et al. 2006). Hormonal and nutrient signals are processed in
the hypothalamus and inform the brain about the free and stored levels of fuel available for the
organism (Cota et al. 2007). In turn, the hypothalamic neuronal circuits use this information
to regulate caloric intake, energy consumption, and peripheral lipid and glucose metabolism.
Because of their intrinsic functional activities, and the necessity to adapt to often dramatic changes in the nutritional status, these neural feeding circuitries are endowed with plasticity modulated
by neurotransmitters and hormones. Among the chemical mediators involved in this integration,
ECs are master regulators of the fast (i.e., mostly nongenomic) and stress-related fine-tuning of
energy intake. Indeed, administration of CB1 agonists and ECs into hypothalamic nuclei induces
eating (Jamshidi and Taylor 2001; Kirkham and Williams 2001a), and EC levels in the hypothalamus vary according to changes in nutritional status. The levels of 2-AG are increased in the hypothalamus after 24 h of food deprivation in rats (Kirkham et al. 2002) and mice (Hanus et al. 2003),
and decline as animals eat, returning to control levels with the onset of satiety (Kirkham et al.
2002). These changes are compatible with the behavioral actions of Δ9-THC and CB1 agonists in
laboratory animals, whose enhanced motivation to eat largely reflects that observed after fasting
in untreated healthy individuals. However, Hanus et al. (2003) also reported that hypothalamic
2-AG levels decrease after 12 days of food restriction. This finding was elegantly explained by the
authors to reflect adaptive behavioral strategies in response to acute or chronic food deprivation.
Thus, during short-term starvation, it is beneficial to produce high levels of the appetite-inducing
2-AG to compel the animal to actively seek food. Conversely, during imposed long-term deprivation, when no food can be found, it may aid survival to conserve energy by reducing the motivation to engage in food seeking—perhaps by reducing the conscious experience of hunger—also
via reduced production of 2-AG in the hypothalamus (Hanus et al. 2003).
The hormone leptin, which originates in adipose tissue and affects a number of appetite-related
factors in the hypothalamus, is a core component in the regulation of food intake and weight control (Lawrence et al. 1999; Schwartz et al. 2000). It is therefore of great interest that a strong functional relationship between ECs and leptin has been demonstrated (Di Marzo et al. 2001; also see
Mechoulam and Fride 2001), and that EC biosynthesis and inactivation can be regulated by this

459

460

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

hormone. Thus, leptin administration, which exerts an anorectic action, suppresses hypothalamic
EC levels in healthy rats, whereas in the hypothalamus of obese and hyperphagic rodents lacking
leptin, such as ob/ob (obese/obese, leptin mutant) mice, or with defective leptin signaling, i.e.,
db/db (diabetes/diabetes, leptin receptor mutant) mice and Zuckerfa/fa (leptin receptor mutant)
rats, EC levels are significantly increased (Di Marzo et al. 2001). Careful studies of food intake,
appetite, and fat mass of CB1 knockout mice showed that these animals display a lean phenotype
throughout their lifetime and are resistant to the obesigenic effect of HFDs. This is different from
the effects of simultaneous deletion of neuropeptide Y (NPY) and Agouti-related protein, transmitters heavily implicated in food intake, which does not result in a lean phenotype (Qian et al.
2002). This comparison may indicate that the EC system is more important for the regulation of
energy balance than either of these orexigenic neuropeptides (McNay et al. 2012).
However, based on the absence of a change in hypothalamic CB1 receptors as well as a lack of
correlation between receptor density and plasma leptin under conditions of diet-induced obesity
(Harrold et al. 2002), Harrold and Williams suggested that hypothalamic CB 1 receptors do not
play a role in driving appetite during dietary obesity, but may stimulate hunger under different
conditions such as starvation (Harrold and Williams 2003). This interpretation does not take into
account the earlier mentioned effects of short- and long-term food deprivation on hypothalamic
2-AG concentrations, nor the inverse correlation between leptin and plasma AEA levels reported
in healthy women and in women with anorexia nervosa (Monteleone et al. 2005). Indeed, the
latter report, while explaining the observed increase in plasma AEA levels during this condition,
which is well known to be characterized by low circulating leptin levels, is at odds with the observation of reduced hypothalamic EC tone during imposed long-term food deprivation. Based on
the increasingly accepted role of the EC system in reward (see later), these other authors suggested
that increased peripheral AEA levels during anorexia nervosa, if reflecting a similar scenario in
the brain, might instead underlie the sense of reward that is often reported during this disorder
and suggested to contribute to persistent voluntary food deprivation (Monteleone et al. 2005). At
any rate, the leptin deficiency-mediated enhanced EC tone during anorexia nervosa might explain
why no successful trial with Δ9-THC has been reported yet for this eating disorder. Furthermore,
the link existing between leptin anorectic actions and inhibition of EC signaling is strengthened
by the recent finding that functional CB1 receptor signaling within the hypothalamus is required
by leptin to exert its effects on food intake and body weight, since selective genetic knock-out of
CB1 receptors in the hypothalamus abolishes the inhibition of food intake by leptin (Cardinal
et al. 2012). Interestingly, the orexigenic actions of another peripheral hormone, stomach-derived
ghrelin, also rely on EC signaling, since they are absent in CB1 knockout mice (Kola et al. 2008).
Very little is presently known about the interaction of the EC system with other mediators
involved in energy control and food intake. Cota and colleagues (Cota et al. 2003) have shown
colocalization of CB1 receptor with appetite regulating hormones in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, i.e., the anorexigenic cocaine amphetamine regulated transcript and
corticotropin-­releasing hormone (CRH), and the orexigenic melanin concentrating hormone
(MCH), while no colocalization was found with the orexigenic neuropeptide, NPY in the arcuate
nucleus. There is also evidence for functional interactions between ECs and orexin-A, an orexigenic peptide that is selectively expressed in the lateral hypothalamus and linked to the stimulation of feeding (Dube et al.1999; Hilairet et al. 2003; Sweet et al. 1999). In an in vitro study, it was
demonstrated that the coexpression of CB1 and OX1 receptors results in a higher potentiation of
ERK signaling, possibly due to heterodimerization/oligomerization of these two receptors (Ward
et al. 2011). Recently, however, it was also shown that 2-AG can be produced and released through
activation of OX1 receptor-mediated signaling, and act as a paracrine or autocrine messenger via

CANNABINOIDS AND APPETITE REGULATION

CB1 receptors (Jäntti et al. 2013; Turunen et al. 2012), thus possibly explaining the potentiation of
ERK phosphorylation that follows OX1/CB1 receptor coexpression. CB1 may also downregulate
CRH signaling, since CB1 receptor knockout mice show higher levels of mRNA for this hormone
(Cota et al. 2003).
Interactions between cannabinoids and the melanocortin system have also been detected in
relation to the observation that rimonabant facilitates the anorectic actions of alpha-melanocyte
stimulating hormone (Verty et al. 2003), while an antagonist of the receptor for this peptide, the
melanocortin receptor type 4, causes a late increase in hypothalamic EC levels concomitant to
its long-term anorectic action in rats (Matias et al. 2008). Evidence was also provided suggesting
that the expression of CB1 receptors located in feeding-relevant hindbrain areas such as the dorsal
motor nucleus of the vagus and the nucleus tractus solitarius may be subject to inhibition by the
anorectic hormone, colecystokinin, or by food consumption (which elevates the levels of this hormone) (Burdyga et al. 2004). In an elegant study by Bellocchio et al. (2010) based on conditional
CB1 deletion in either glutamatergic or GABAergic forebrain neurons, the authors suggested
that exogenous Δ9-THC, as well as EC level elevation induced by fasting or exposure to palatable
food, produced not only the expected hyperphagic effect, but also (and in the case of Δ9-THC, at
higher doses) a more surprising hypophagic effect, depending on the restriction of their action to
CB1 on excitatory or inhibitory terminals, respectively (Bellocchio et al. 2010). That CB 1 activation on different axon terminal populations could potentially produce opposing effects on food
intake could have been surmised also from a previous in vitro study (Huang et al. 2007), although
with conclusions seemingly opposite to those obtained by Bellocchio and colleagues. In fact, in
the lateral hypothalamus, CB1 activation was shown to result in retrograde inhibition of GABA
or glutamate release from inputs onto MCH, or orexin-A releasing neurons, thereby resulting in
disinhibition or inhibition of stimulation, respectively, of two orexigenic signals, and in potential
orexigenic or anorexic effects. On the other hand, it was also found that presynaptic CB1 activation inhibits glutamate release onto parvocellular neurons, resulting in inhibition of the release
into the paraventricular nucleus of the anorexic hormone, CRH (Malcher-Lopes et al. 2006). At
any rate, and regardless of these in vitro studies, it is clear that the hypophagic phenotype which
occurs after global or conditioned deletion of CB1 on glutamatergic neuronal inputs (Bellocchio
et al. 2010) is similar to that following pharmacological CB1 receptor antagonism by agents like
the CB1 antagonist, rimonabant. On this basis, it is reasonable to assume that the effect of CB1 on
glutamatergic signaling overall predominates over that on GABAergic signaling when it comes
to explaining the hypophagic effects of CB1 blockade, or the hyperphagic effects of low doses of
Δ9-THC, in wild-type mice.
24.2.2 ECs, CB1, and orosensory reward

Increasing evidence supports the notion that the ECS plays a pivotal role in reward/reinforcement circuits of the mesolimbic system. In the striatum, the distribution of CB1-expressing neurons exhibits a progressive dorsolateral-to-ventromedial reduction, with fewer CB 1-positive
neurons in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) (Herkenham et al. 1990). However, although expression of CB1 in the NAc is low, manipulation of CB1 signaling within the NAc triggers robust
emotional/­motivational alterations related to food and drug addiction and other psychiatric
disorders, and these effects cannot be exclusively attributed to CB1 located at afferents to the NAc.
Winters et al. (2012) demonstrated that CB1-positive neurons within the NAc are exclusively fast-­
spiking interneurons (FSIs), electrically coupled with each other, and thus may help synchronize
­populations/ensembles of NAc neurons. These FSIs are not only electrically connected with each

461

462

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

other but exert extensive inhibitory control over nearby medium spiny neurons, the principal
neurons in the NAc, via monosynaptic connections. Furthermore, the membrane excitability of
these neurons becomes significantly upregulated and influences the overall functional output of
the NAc by modulating both dopaminergic and opioidergic pathways, thereby participating in
reinforcing both the “liking” and “wanting” of highly palatable food.
In limbic forebrain sections containing the NAc, similar to the hypothalamus, short-term food
deprivation and refeeding are accompanied by increased and decreased EC levels, respectively
(Kirkham et al. 2002). On the other hand, injection into the shell of the NAc of 2-AG, AEA, and
agents that inhibit EC inactivation stimulates food intake (Kirkham et al. 2002; Soria-Gómez et al.
2007) and increases the activity of hypothalamic neurons, particularly in the lateral hypothalamus,
which also participates in reward (Soria-Gómez et al. 2007). These data, together with the wellknown ability of CB1 antagonists to reduce the rewarding effects of food as well as of drugs of abuse,
confirm behavioral studies indicating that activation of CB1 receptors by Δ9-THC or endocannabinoids enhances food intake by reinforcing the motivational and hedonic aspects of feeding behavior. Indeed, studies carried out by injecting anandamide in the NAc identified a 1.6 mm3 “hotspot”
in the dorsal medial shell of this area, specifically responsible for the sensory pleasure induced by
intraoral sucrose (Mahler et al. 2007). Furthermore, injection into the NAc of Δ9-THC increases
sucrose-induced hedonic activity and dopamine release (De Luca et al. 2012). On the other hand,
CB1 antagonists reduce the increase of extracellular dopamine release in the NAc provoked by
novel highly palatable food (Melis et al. 2007), which is suggestive of a possible palatable foodinduced activation of EC tone in this area. Harrold and colleagues (2002) have shown that NAc CB1
receptors are downregulated in rats under a HFD. This effect is consistent with increased activation, and subsequent downregulation, of these receptors by ECs, and suggests that they mediate
the hedonic evaluation of palatable foods. Furthermore, in mice made obese by a HFD, EC levels
are upregulated in the hippocampus, which is another important anatomical substrate of hedonic
eating, indicating that high-energy foods may be more satisfying under these conditions, resulting
in a vicious circle leading to obesity (Massa et al. 2010). In the hypothalamus, which, as mentioned
earlier, is involved in the control of reward through its lateral hypothalamus-originating connections with the mesolimbic system, 2-AG is transiently or permanently upregulated following acute
or prolonged fat consumption, respectively, thus possibly participating in both the induction and
maintenance stage of HFD preference (Higuchi et al. 2011).
EC signaling in both central and peripheral tissues might also modulate the way the sensory
properties of food are perceived, in a manner that maximizes food intake. Thus, the levels of 2-AG
are elevated in the olfactory epithelium of tadpoles following food deprivation and the subsequent
activation of CB1 in this tissue lowers odor detection thresholds, thus rendering olfactory neurons
more sensitive and heightening food-seeking behavior (Breunig et al. 2010). CB1 receptor activation by ECs in type II taste cells that also express the T1r3 sweet taste receptor, increases behavioral responses and electrophysiological responses of taste receptor cells to sweet compounds,
without affecting responses to salty, sour, bitter, and umami compounds. Thus, opposite to leptin,
the ECS also enhances the sensory properties of sweet foods (Yoshida et al. 2010). Furthermore,
simple mouth exposure to fatty food in “sham-fed” rats leads to vagus nerve-mediated increases of
EC levels in the small intestine, which then, by activating CB1 in this gut region, may participate
in stimulating fat food intake (DiPatrizio et al. 2011). Finally, also in the pontine parabrachial
nucleus, a brainstem region associated with the gustatory properties of food and that receives
inputs from the vagus and transmits these to higher centers for reward control, CB1 stimulation
by exogenous agonists or ECs enhances the consumption of palatable foods containing fat and/or
sugar (DiPatrizio and Simansky 2008).

CANNABINOIDS AND APPETITE REGULATION

In healthy human volunteers, consumption of a favorite food, as compared to normal food,
was recently shown to be accompanied by elevated 2-AG plasma levels, which in turn correlated
positively with elevated ghrelin plasma levels (Monteleone et al. 2012). This effect might be due
to direct or indirect (e.g., ghrelin-mediated) effects of palatable food consumption on central and
peripheral EC levels, briefly mentioned earlier. However, the volunteers, who knew what type
of food they would be given, exhibited higher 2-AG plasma levels also 10 min before consuming their favorite food. This might suggest that anticipatory mechanisms also trigger changes
in peripheral EC levels, which might again participate in both the motivational and rewarding/
sensory aspects of palatable food.
ECs may also have important functional relationships with the endogenous opioid system,
which also mediates the rewarding properties of food (Kirkham 1991). Thus, in rats, the hyperphagic action of Δ9-THC is reversed by the μ-opioid receptor antagonist, naloxone (Williams and
Kirkham 2002b). Importantly, the facilitatory effects of a CB1 agonist on responding for palatable
solutions were reversed by both a CB1 antagonist and naloxone (Gallate and McGregor 1999).
Moreover, low doses of rimonabant and naloxone that are behaviorally inactive when administered alone, synergize to produce a profound anorectic action when coadministered (Kirkham
and Williams 2001b; Rowland et al. 2001). Given the established ability of opioid antagonists
to reduce the hedonic evaluation of foods and to reverse CB1 agonist-stimulated ingestion, the
potentiation of anorexia by combined CB1 and opioid receptor blockade strengthens the proposition that ECs contribute to orosensory reward processes.
Finally, and in agreement with the hypothesis that ECs and CB1 can also produce anorectic
actions in a site-specific manner, a very recent study showed that the ECS mediates, through
retrograde signaling, the inhibitory effect of insulin on excitatory (glutamatergic) axons which
innervate dopaminergic neurons of the mouse ventral tegmental area (Labouèbe et al. 2013).
As a result, the ECS is involved in insulin-induced reduction of motivation and preference for
palatable food cues, and this seems to contradict the concept that activation of CB1 receptors
on glutamatergic neurons exclusively induces stimulatory effects on food intake (Bellocchio
et al. 2010).

24.3 Pharmacological effects of non-Δ9-THC cannabinoids

in relation to appetite
The plant Cannabis sativa contains over 100 compounds derived from a diterpene structure,
known as “cannabinoids” (ElSohly and Slade 2005; Mehmedic et al. 2010). The large number
of cannabinoids present in the plant—and the low naturally occurring levels of some of them—­
rendered it difﬁcult to obtain sufﬁcient quantities of such pure chemical entities in the past, thus
explaining in part the slow progress of our understanding of the pharmacology of most of these
compounds. Among non-Δ9-THC cannabinoids, the best characterized compounds are currently
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin (Δ9-THCV), CBD, and cannabinol (CBN) (Gaoni and Mechoulam
1964; Gill et al. 1970; Mechoulam and Shvo 1963). Given the ever-increasing number of reports
on their effects on food intake and energy balance, it is possible that Δ9-THCV and CBD have
important and, as yet, unexplored clinical roles in cannabis (i.e., marijuana) consumption-induced
changes in eating behavior.
However, prior to 2009, there were very few studies investigating the actions of individual nonΔ9-THC “phytocannabinoids” on feeding, the majority of which have been either unreplicated
or contradictory. More recent animal data indicate that these cannabinoids produce signiﬁcant
effects on the appetitive, but not consummatory, aspects of feeding behavior. Nevertheless, no

463

464

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

detailed analysis of changes in feeding microstructure has yet been undertaken, which limits the
extent to which these new findings can be interpreted.
24.3.1 Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin

There is a broad literature implicating CB1 receptor blockade as a potential antiobesity strategy;
however, the recent withdrawal of inverse agonists such as rimonabant or taranabant, because
of unwanted psychiatric side effects (i.e., anxiety and depression), has highlighted the need to
develop safer alternatives (Izzo et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2009; Silvestri and Di Marzo 2012). In particular, neutral antagonists at CB1 receptors have been recently suggested to be safer than inverse
agonists because, whilst still efficacious at reducing food intake, they do not produce the anxiogenic actions of the latter, nor do they reduce motivation for reward, and hence are devoid of the
potential anhedonic actions of agents like rimonabant (Meye et al. 2013; Silvestri and Di Marzo
2012). One compound with such neutral CB1 antagonist action in vitro and in vivo, Δ9-THCV
(Pertwee et al. 2007; Thomas et al. 2005), is present in the Cannabis plant (Gill et al. 1970) and
was recently subjected to further pharmacological characterization. In particular, Riedel et al.
(2009) investigated the effects on feeding by lean mice of Δ9-THCV (3, 10, and 30 mg/kg, intraperitoneally (i.p.)) and of a Δ9-THCV SCE (standardized cannabis extract) also administered at a
Δ9-THCV dose of 3, 10, or 30 mg/kg, i.p. All doses of pure Δ9-THCV signiﬁcantly reduced food
intake during the 12 h following treatment, whereas Δ9-THCV SCE did not affect consumption.
The authors suggested that future work should investigate effects of puriﬁed Δ9-THCV and Δ9THCV SCE using conditions which would be expected to maximize food intake (e.g., during
the dark phase of the light–dark cycle or following periods of deprivation), thus ensuring high
baseline food intake and possibly unmasking stronger effects of these cannabinoid-based preparations on food intake. It must be pointed out, however, that other molecular targets, apart from
CB1 receptors, are emerging for Δ9-THCV that might explain its anorectic effects, including CB2
receptor agonism (Romero-Zerbo et al. 2012; Thomas et al. 2005) and transient receptor potential
vanilloid type-1 (TRPV1) channel activation (De Petrocellis et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2005).
24.3.2 Cannabidiol and other phytocannabinoids

In 1976, Soﬁa and Knobloch examined the acute effects of two non-Δ9-THC cannabinoids, CBD
and CBN (both at 50 mg/kg, i.p.), on food and sucrose consumption. In this paradigm, animals were
pretrained to consume their total daily food intake during a 6 h feeding period; water, 5% sucrose,
or 20% sucrose solutions were also available during this period. Both CBN and CBD signiﬁcantly
reduced food intake, effects which persisted for 4–5 days post drug administration (Soﬁa and
Knobloch 1976). However, the two compounds affected sucrose consumption to a significantly
smaller extent, with a reduction that returned to pre-baseline levels by day 3–4 post drug administration. The authors interpreted these ﬁndings as suggestive that CBN and CBD produced a
preference for sweet calories. It should also be noted that the Soﬁa and Knobloch (1976) study used
doses of CBN and CBD between 200 and 1500 times greater than those used in more recent studies that have suggested that these non-Δ9-THC phytocannabinoids stimulate feeding (Farrimond
et al. 2010a, 2010b, 2012a, 2012b; see later). Much later, Wiley et al. (2005) showed that CBD (3–100
mg/kg, i.p.) failed to signiﬁcantly alter food intake in mice; yet it should be noted that, in this study,
doses of 3 and 10 mg/kg CBD showed a nonsigniﬁcant trend toward an increase in intake, suggesting that CBD may be worthy of further investigation. However, a recent study by Scopinho
et al. (2011) showed that CBD (1, 10, or 20 mg/kg, i.p.) failed to alter feeding in rats and failed to
replicate the nonsigniﬁcant trend toward an increase in feeding at low doses, and similar data, in

CANNABINOIDS AND APPETITE REGULATION

mice, obtained using a dose of 10.0 mg/kg (i.p.), were also recently reported by Riedel et al. (2009).
Nevertheless, Scopinho et al. (2011) did find that CBD could prevent the hyperphagic effects induced
by the CB1/CB2 agonist, WIN55,212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl)
pyrrolo[1,2,3-de]-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-naphthalenylmethanone mesylate), and the 5-HT1A
(5-hydroxytryptamine subtype 1A) receptor agonist, 8-OH-DPAT (8-hydroxy-N,N-dipropyl2-aminotetralin). Furthermore, CBD (2.5 and 5 mg/kg/day, i.p., for 14 days) was recently reported
to produce signiﬁcant decreases in body weight in rats, although no measures of food intake were
taken in this study (Ignatowska-Jankowska et al. 2011); interestingly, CBD action was sensitive to
coadministration of the CB2 receptor selective antagonist, AM630 (6-iodopravadoline), suggesting
that a CB2 receptor-mediated mechanism may be critical to the action of this compound. However,
CBD has very low affinity for CB1 and CB2 receptors, but exerts a wide array of other effects in
vitro, including modulation of Ca2+ homeostasis (Ryan et al. 2009), TRPV1 channel activation (De
Petrocellis et al. 2008), and inhibition of AEA cellular reuptake and enzymatic hydrolysis, and hence
potential cannabinoid receptor “indirect” agonism (Bisogno et al. 2001; Izzo et al. 2009), whilst also
exhibiting functional and “indirect” antagonism at CB1 receptors (Thomas et al. 2007). In summary,
although the data describing the effects of CBD on feeding have remained inconclusive for several
decades, the overall impression, from reports published before 2012, is that this compound could
affect food intake under certain circumstances. However, the molecular mechanisms by which CBD
would exert this action and eventually influence body weight, remain to be established.
Indeed, very recently, Farrimond et al. (2012a) demonstrated that lower doses (up to 4.4 mg/kg)
of CBD, when administered orally can induce significant reductions in chow consumption in
mice over a 4 h period. Specifically, CBD oral administration induced only subtle, nonsignificant
reductions in animal intake during any individual hour of the test; however, together, this led to
a significant reduction in total chow intake over the test period due to significant reductions in
intake during all meals. It is worthwhile mentioning that these apparent late-onset suppressive
effects may reflect the relatively slow pharmacokinetic profile of CBD, since Deiana et al. (2012)
have recently shown that brain levels of CBD continue to rise progressively for 4 h, following an
admittedly much higher oral dose (120 mg/kg), in mice and rats. Despite these effects on hourly
intakes, CBD administration had no significant effect on any other critical meal parameters
linked to CB1 receptor activation. Since CBD is unlikely to directly interact with CB1 (Hill et al.
2012), these data may suggest that low-dose CBD can affect a feeding pathway which is unrelated
to the ECS. Apart from the doses used, another difference between the study of Farrimond et al.
(2012a, 2012b) and previous studies on the effects of CBD (see earlier) was that in none of these
former investigations did the authors use prefed animals, i.e., a condition that may facilitate the
finding of anorectic actions, although not when ECs are involved (rimonabant is usually more
efficacious in fasted vs. ad lib fed rodents). This observation may again indicate that non-CB1mediated mechanisms are involved in the effect of CBD.
In conclusion, the short-term CBD-induced feeding reductions reported in the studies by
Farrimond and colleagues suggest that relatively low oral doses of this cannabinoid can reduce
consummatory behavior. However, given the pharmacological profile of CBD, such effects are
unlikely to be CB1 mediated. Finally, in agreement, instead, with the activity of CBN as a partial
agonist at CB1 receptors, these authors confirmed that this other cannabinoid, which is a degradation product formed from Δ9-THC in cannabis preparations, can induce food intake in rats via
significant reductions in the latency to feed and increases in consummatory behaviors, due to
increases in meal size and duration, which is compatible with CB1 activation. The other phytocannabinoid tested in this study, cannabigerol, produced instead no effect whatsoever on food intake
(Farrimond et al. 2012a).

465

466

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

24.4 Conclusions
The stimulatory effect on food intake is one of the best known pharmacological actions of cannabis preparations used for recreational purposes. However, although over the last 25 years, and
particularly after the discovery of CB1 and CB2 receptors, much progress has been made in the
understanding of the mechanisms through which Δ9-THC affects food intake and energy metabolism (Silvestri and Di Marzo 2013), the application of this knowledge to the development of
novel, efficacious, and safe treatments for cachexia and, particularly, anorexia, has unfortunately
lagged behind. In the former condition, which is a hallmark of several chronic wasting disorders,
the lack of a truly efficacious cannabinoid-based therapy is probably also due to the fact that the
use of Δ9-THC has been limited by its central unwanted side effects, which narrow the therapeutic window for this compound. This problem might be solved by the use of botanical drugs such
as Sativex® (Russo 2011), the presence of CBD in which allows for the administration of higher
and otherwise not tolerated doses of Δ9-THC. Given the slight inhibitory effects of CBD on food
intake, it is possible that combinations of lower doses of this compound with higher doses of Δ9THC, rather than Sativex® itself, might do the trick. Given the potentially important role of lean
mass, and hence skeletal muscle loss, in cachexia, it is also possible that the so far only partial
knowledge of the role of the ECS in this tissue (see Heyman et al. 2012, for a recent review) may
have hampered the development of EC-based therapies for this condition. In the case of anorexia
nervosa, instead, it is possible to hypothesize, from the data available to date, that the ECS may
be deregulated in different ways during the course of this eating disorder, and thus play opposing
roles in its onset and progression. Therefore, it is still not clear whether interventions that enhance
or reduce the activity of CB1 receptors should be employed for its pharmacological treatment,
again, perhaps, suggesting the clinical testing of Δ 9-THC and CBD combinations. The future
development of more clinically relevant experimental models of anorexia nervosa is to be awaited
to facilitate mechanistic studies in this direction. At any rate, the ever increasing understanding of
EC roles in food intake and energy metabolism, and the discovery of the additional mechanisms
of action that will likely follow future investigations of non-Δ9-THC phytocannabinoids, are likely
to provide us, in the not so distant future, with new weapons to combat the two so far untreatable
and life-threatening conditions that are cachexia and anorexia.

References
Andrykowski, M.A. (1988). Defining anticipatory nausea and vomiting: differences among cancer chemotherapy patients who report pretreatment nausea. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 11, 59–69.
Arnone, M., Maruani, J., Chaperon, F., et al. (1997). Selective inhibition of sucrose and ethanol intake by
SR 141716, an antagonist of central cannabinoid (CB1) receptors. Psychopharmacology, 132, 104–106.
Beal, J.E., Olson, R., Lefkowitz, L., et al. (1997). Long-term efficacy and safety of dronabinol for acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome-associated anorexia.Journal of Pain Symptom Management, 14, 7–14.
Bellocchio, L., Lafenetre, P., Cannich, A., et al. (2010). Bimodal control of stimulated food intake by the
endocannabinoid system. Nature Neuroscience, 13, 281–283.
Bisogno, T., Hanus, L., De Petrocellis, L., et al. (2001). Molecular targets for cannabidiol and its synthetic
analogues: effect on vanilloid VR1 receptors and on the cellular uptake and enzymatic hydrolysis of
anandamide. British Journal of Pharmacology, 134, 845–852.
Breunig, E., Czesnik, D., Piscitelli, F., Di Marzo,V., Manzini, I., and Schild, D. (2010). Endocannabinoid
modulation in the olfactory epithelium. Results and Problems in Cell Differentiation, 52, 139–145.
Burdyga, G., Lal, S., Varro, A., Dimaline, R., Thompson, D.G., and Dockray G.J. (2004). Expression of
cannabinoid CB1 receptors by vagal afferent neurons is inhibited by cholecystokinin. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 24, 2708–2715.

CANNABINOIDS AND APPETITE REGULATION

Clapham, J.C., Arch, J.R.S., and Tadayyon, M. (2001). Anti-obesity drugs: a critical review of current
therapies and future opportunities. Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 89, 81–121.
Cardinal, P., Bellocchio, L., Clark, S., et al. (2012). Hypothalamic CB1 cannabinoid receptors regulate
energy balance in mice. Endocrinology, 153, 4136–4143.
Chaperon, F., Soubrié, P., Puech, A.J., and Thiébot, M.H. (1998). Involvement of central cannabinoid
(CB1) receptors in the establishment of place conditioning in rats. Psychopharmacology, 135, 324–332.
Chopra, R.N. and Chopra, G.S. (1939). The present position of hemp drug addiction in India. Indian
Medical Research Memoirs, 31, 1–119.
Cota, D., Marsicano, G., Tschöp, M., et al. (2003). The endogenous cannabinoid system affects energy
balance via central orexigenic drive and peripheral lipogenesis. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 112,
423–431.
Cota, D., Proulx, K., and Seeley, R.J. (2007). The role of CNS fuel sensing in energy and glucose regulation.
Gastroenterology, 132, 2158–2168.
De Luca, M.A., Solinas, M., Bimpisidis, Z., Goldberg, S.R., and Di Chiara, G. (2012). Cannabinoid facilitation of behavioral and biochemical hedonic taste responses. Neuropharmacology, 63, 161–168.
De Petrocellis, L., Vellani, V., and Schiano-Moriello, A. (2008). Plant-derived cannabinoids modulate
the activity of transient receptor potential channels of ankyrin type-1 and melastatin type-8. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 325, 1007–1015.
Deiana, S., Watanabe A., Yamasaki Y., et al. (2012). Plasma and brain pharmacokinetic profile of cannabidiol (CBD), cannabidivarine (CBDV), Δ⁹-tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV) and cannabigerol (CBG)
in rats and mice following oral and intraperitoneal administration and CBD action on obsessivecompulsive behaviour. Psychopharmacology, 219, 859–873.
Deroche-Gamonet, V., Le Moal, M., Piazza, P.V., and Soubrié, P. (2001). SR141716, a CB1 receptor
antagonist, decreases the sensitivity to the reinforcing effects of electrical brain stimulation in rats.
Psychopharmacology, 157, 254–259.
Di Marzo, V. (2011). Endocannabinoid signaling in the brain: biosynthetic mechanisms in the limelight.
Nature Neuroscience, 14, 9–15.
Di Marzo, V., Goparaju, S.K., Wang, L., et al. (2001). Leptin-regulated endocannabinoids are involved in
maintaining food intake. Nature, 410, 822–825.
DiPatrizio, N.V., Astarita, G., Schwartz, G., Li, X., and Piomelli, D. (2011). Endocannabinoid signal in
the gut controls dietary fat intake. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 108, 12904–12908.
DiPatrizio, N.V. and Simansky, K.J. (2008). Activating parabrachial cannabinoid CB1 receptors selectively
stimulates feeding of palatable foods in rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 9702–979.
Dube, M.G., Kalra, S.P., and Kalra, P.S. (1999). Food intake elicited by central administration of orexins/
hypocretins: identification of hypothalamic sites of action. Brain Research, 842, 473–477.
Elsohly, M.A. and Slade, D. (2005). Chemical constituents of marijuana: the complex mixture of natural
cannabinoids. Life Sciences, 78, 539–548.
Farrimond, J.A., Hill, A.J., Whalley, B.J., and Williams, C.M. (2010a). Cannabis constituents modulate
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol-induced hyperphagia in rats. Psychopharmacology, 210, 97–106.
Farrimond, J.A., Whalley, B.J., and Williams, C.M. (2010b). A low-Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol cannabis
extract induces hyperphagia in rats. Behavioral Pharmacology, 21, 769–772.
Farrimond, J.A., Whalley, B.J., and Williams, C.M. (2012a). Cannabinol and cannabidiol exert opposing
effects on rat feeding patterns. Psychopharmacology, 223, 117–129.
Farrimond, J.A., Whalley, B.J., and Williams, C.M. (2012b). Non-Δ-9 tetrahydrocannabinol phytocannabinoids stimulate feeding in rats. Behavioral Pharmacology, 23, 113–117.
Feigenbaum, J.J., Richmond, S.A., Weissman, Y., and Mechoulam, R. (1989). Inhibition of cis platininduced emesis in the pigeon by a non-psychotropic synthetic cannabinoid. European Journal of
Pharmacology, 169, 159–165.

467

468

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Foltin, R.W., Brady, J.V., and Fischman, M.W. (1986). Behavioral analysis of marijuana effects on food
intake in humans. Pharmacology Biochemistry & Behavior, 25, 577–582.
Foltin, R.W., Fischman, M.W., and Byrne, M.F. (1988). Effects of smoked marijuana on food intake and
body weight of humans living in a residential laboratory. Appetite, 11, 1–14.
Gallate, J.E. and McGregor, I.S. (1999). The motivation for beer in rats: effects of ritanserin, naloxone and
SR 141716. Psychopharmacology, 142, 302–308.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964). Isolation, structure and partial synthesis of an active constituent of
hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86, 1646–1647.
Gill, E.W., Paton, W.D., and Pertwee, R.G. (1970). Preliminary experiments on the chemistry and pharmacology of cannabis. Nature, 228, 134–136.
Hanus, L., Avraham, Y., Ben-Shushan, D., Zolotarev, O., Berry, E.M., and Mechoulam, R. (2003). Shortterm fasting and prolonged semistarvation have opposite effects on 2-AG levels in mouse brain. Brain
Research, 983, 144–151.
Harrold, J.A., Elliott, J.C., King, P.J., Widdowson, P.S., and Williams, G. (2002). Downregulation of
cannabinoid-1 (CB-1) receptors in specific extrahypothalamic regions of rats with dietary obesity: a
role for endogenous cannabinoids in driving appetite for palatable food? Brain Research, 952, 232–238.
Harrold, J.A. and Williams, G. (2003). The cannabinoid system: a role in both the homeostatic and hedonic control of eating? British Journal of Nutrition, 90, 729–734.
Heyman, E., Gamelin, F.X., Aucouturier, J., and Di Marzo, V. (2012). The role of the endocannabinoid
system in skeletal muscle and metabolic adaptations to exercise: potential implications for the treatment
of obesity. Obesity Reviews, 13, 1110–1124.
Herkenham, M., Lynn, A.B., Little, M.D., et al. (1990). Cannabinoid receptor localization in brain.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 87, 1932–1936.
Higuchi, S., Ohji, M., Araki, M., et al. (2011). Increment of hypothalamic 2-arachidonoylglycerol induces
the preference for a high-fat diet via activation of cannabinoid 1 receptors. Behavioural Brain Research,
216, 477–480.
Hilairet, S., Bouaboula, M., Carriere, D., Le Fur, G., and Casellas, P. (2003). Hypersensitization of the
orexin 1 receptor by the CB1 receptor: evidence for cross-talk blocked by the specific CB1 antagonist,
SR141716. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 278, 23731–23737.
Hill, A.J., Williams, C.M., Whalley, B.J., and Stephens G.J. (2012). Phytocannabinoids as novel therapeutic
agents in CNS disorders. Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 133, 79–97.
Hollister, L.E. (1971). Actions of various marihuana derivatives in man. Pharmacological Reviews, 23,
349–357.
Huang, H., Acuna-Goycolea, C., Li, Y., Cheng, H.M., Obrietan, K., and van den Pol, A.N. (2007).
Cannabinoids excite hypothalamic melanin-concentrating hormone but inhibit hypocretin/orexin
neurons: implications for cannabinoid actions on food intake and cognitive arousal. Journal of
Neuroscience, 27, 4870–4881.
Huestis, M.A., Gorelick, D.A., Heishman, S.J., et al. (2001). Blockade of effects of smoked marijuana
by the CB1-selective cannabinoid receptor antagonist SR141716. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58,
322–328.
Ignatowska-Jankowska, B., Jankowski, M.M., and Swiergiel, A.H. (2011). Cannabidiol decreases body
weight gain in rats: involvement of CB2 receptors. Neuroscience Letters, 490, 82–84.
Izzo, A., Borrelli, F., Capasso, R., Di Marzo, V., and Mechoulam, R. (2009). Non-psychotropic plant cannabinoids: new therapeutic opportunities from an ancient herb. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 30,
515–527.
Jamshidi, N. and Taylor, D.A. (2001). Anandamide administration into the ventromedial hypothalamus
stimulates appetite in rats. British Journal of Pharmacology, 134, 1151–1154.
Jäntti, M.H., Putula, J., Turunen, P.M., et al. (2013). Autocrine endocannabinoid signaling through CB1
receptors potentiates OX1 orexin receptor signaling. Molecular Pharmacology, 83, 621–632.

CANNABINOIDS AND APPETITE REGULATION

Kano, M., Ohno-Shosaku, T., Hashimotodani, Y., Uchigashima, M., and Watanabe, M. (2009).
Endocannabinoid-mediated control of synaptic transmission. Physiological Reviews, 89, 309–380.
Kirkham, T.C. (1991). Opioids and feeding reward. Appetite, 17, 74–75.
Kirkham, T.C. (2005). Endocannabinoids in the regulation of appetite and body weight. Behavioral
Pharmacology, 16, 297–313.
Kirkham, T.C. and Williams, C.M. (2001a). Synergistic effects of opioid and cannabinoid antagonists on
food intake. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 153, 267–270.
Kirkham, T.C. and Williams, C.M. (2001b). Endocannabinoids: neuromodulators of food craving?
In: M. Hetherington (ed.). Food Cravings and Addiction. Leatherhead: Leatherhead Publishing,
pp. 85–120.
Kirkham, T.C., Williams, C.M., Fezza, F., and Di Marzo, V. (2002). Endocannabinoid levels in rat limbic
forebrain and hypothalamus in relation to fasting, feeding and satiation: stimulation of eating by 2arachidonoyl glycerol. British Journal of Pharmacology, 136, 550–557.
Koch, J.E. (2001). Delta(9)-THC stimulates food intake in Lewis rats: effects on chow, high-fat and sweet
high-fat diets. Pharmacology Biochemistry & Behavior, 68, 539–543.
Kola, B., Farkas, I., Christ-Crain, M., et al. (2008). The orexigenic effect of ghrelin is mediated through
central activation of the endogenous cannabinoid system. Public Library of Science One, 3, 1797.
Labouèbe, G., Liu, S., Dias, C., et al. (2013). Insulin induces long-term depression of ventral tegmental area
dopamine neurons via endocannabinoids. Nature Neuroscience, 16, 300–308.
Lawrence, C.B., Turnbull, A.V., and Rothwell, N.J. (1999). Hypothalamic control of feeding. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 9, 778–783.
Lee, S., Kim, D.H., Yoon, S.H., and Ryu, J.H. (2009). Sub-chronic administration of rimonabant causes
loss of antidepressive activity and decreases doublecortin immunoreactivity in the mouse hippocampus.
Neuroscience Letters, 467, 111–116.
Limebeer, C.L. and Parker, L.A. (1999). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol interferes with the establishment
and the expression of conditioned rejection reactions produced by cyclophosphamide: a rat model of
nausea. Neuroreport, 10, 3769–3772.
Loewe, S. (1946). Studies on the pharmacology and acute toxicity of compounds with marihuana activity.
Journal of Pharmacology Experimental Therapy, 88, 154–161.
Mahler, S.V., Smith, K.S., and Berridge, K.C. (2007). Endocannabinoid hedonic hotspot for sensory pleasure:
anandamide in nucleus accumbens shell enhances ‘liking’ of a sweet reward. Neuropsychopharmacology,
32, 2267–2278.
Malcher-Lopes, R., Di, S., Marcheselli, V.S., et al. (2006). Opposing crosstalk between leptin and glucocorticoids rapidly modulates synaptic excitation via endocannabinoid release. The Journal of Neuroscience,
26, 6643–6650.
Massa, F., Mancini, G., Schmidt, H., et al. (2010). Alterations in the hippocampal endocannabinoid system
in diet-induced obese mice. The Journal of Neuroscience, 30, 6273–6281.
Matias, I., Vergoni, A.V., Petrosino, S., et al. (2008). Regulation of hypothalamic endocannabinoid levels
by neuropeptides and hormones involved in food intake and metabolism: insulin and melanocortins.
Neuropharmacology, 54, 206–212.
McCarthy, L.E. and Borison, H.L. (1984). Cisplatin-induced vomiting eliminated by ablation of the area
postrema in cats. Cancer Treatement Reports, 68, 401–404.
McNay, D.E.G.,Briançon, N., Kokoeva, M.V., Maratos-Flier, E., and Flier, J.S. (2012). Remodeling of the
arcuate nucleus energy-balance circuit is inhibited in obese mice. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 122,
142–152.
Mechoulam, R. and Fride, E. (2001). Physiology. A hunger for cannabinoids. Nature, 410, 763–765.
Mechoulam, R., Hanus, L., and Fride, E. (1998). Towards cannabinoid drugs revisited. Progress in
Medicinal Chemistry, 35, 199–243.
Mechoulam, R. and Shvo, Y. (1963). Hashish I. The structure of cannabidiol. Tetrahedron. 19, 2073–2078.

469

470

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Mehmedic, Z., Chandra, S., Slade, D., et al. (2010). Potency trends of Δ9-THC and other cannabinoids in
confiscated cannabis preparations from 1993 to 2008. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 55, 1209–1217.
Melis, T., Succu, S., Sanna, F., Boi, A., Argiolas, A., and Melis, M.R. (2007). The cannabinoid antagonist
SR 141716A (Rimonabant) reduces the increase of extra-cellular dopamine release in the rat nucleus
accumbens induced by a novel high palatable food. Neuroscience Letters, 419, 231–235.
Meye, F.J., Trezza, V., Vanderschuren, L.J., Ramakers, G.M., and Adan, R.A. (2013). Neutral antagonism
at the cannabinoid 1 receptor: a safer treatment for obesity. Molecular Psychiatry, 18, 1294–1301.
Monteleone, P., Matias, I., Martiadis, V., De Petrocellis, L., Maj, M., and Di Marzo, V. (2005). Blood levels of the endocannabinoid anandamide are increased in anorexia nervosa and in binge-eating disorder,
but not in bulimia nervosa. Neuropsychopharmacology, 30, 1216–1221.
Monteleone, P., Piscitelli, F., Scognamiglio, P., et al. (2012). Hedonic eating is associated with increased
peripheral levels of ghrelin and the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoyl-glycerol in healthy humans: a pilot
study. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 97, 917–924.
Morrow, G.R., Hickok, J.T., Burish, T.G., and Rosenthal, S.N. (1996). Frequency and clinical implications
of delayed nausea and delayed emesis. American Journal of Clinical Oncology, 19, 199–203.
Morton, G.J., Cummings, D.E., Baskin, D.G., Barsh, G.S., and Schwartz, M.W. (2006). Central nervous
system control of food intake and body weight. Nature, 443, 289–295.
O’Gorman, P., McMillan, D.C., and McArdle, C.S. (2000). Prognostic factors in advanced gastrointestinal
cancer patients with weight loss. Nutrition and Cancer, 37, 36–40.
O’Shaugnessy, W. (1843). On the Cannabis indica or Indian hemp, Journal of Pharmacology, 2, 594.
Parker, L.A., Kwiatkowska, M., Burton, P., and Mechoulam, R. (2004). Effect of cannabinoids on lithiuminduced vomiting in the Suncus murinus (house musk shrew). Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 171,
156–161.
Parker, L.A., Mechoulam, R., and Schlievert, C. (2002). Cannabidiol, a non-psychoactive component of
cannabis and its synthetic dimethylheptyl homolog suppress nausea in an experimental model with rats.
Neuroreport, 13, 567–570.
Pertwee, R.G., Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A., et al. (2007). The psychoactive plant cannabinoid,
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, is antagonized by Δ8- and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin in mice in vivo. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 586–594.
Plasse, T.F. (1991). Clinical use of dronabinol. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 9, 2079–2080.
Qian, S., Chen, H., Weingarth, D., et al. (2002). Neither agouti-related protein nor neuropeptide Y
is critically required for the regulation of energy homeostasis in mice. Molecular Cell Biology, 22,
5027–5035.
Riedel, G., Fadda, P., McKillop-Smith, S., Pertwee, R.G., Platt, B., and Robinson, L. (2009). Synthetic and
plant-derived cannabinoid receptor antagonists show hypophagic properties in fasted and non-fasted
mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 156, 1154–1166.
Riggs, P.K., Vaida, F., Rossi, S.S., et al. (2012). A pilot study of the effects of cannabis on appetite hormones in HIV-infected adult men. Brain Research, 1431, 46–52.
Romero-Zerbo, S.Y., Garcia-Gutierrez, M.S., Suárez, J., et al. (2012). Overexpression of cannabinoid
CB2 receptor in the brain induces hyperglycaemia and a lean phenotype in adult mice. Journal of
Neuroendocrinology, 24, 1106–1119.
Rowland, N.E., Mukherjee, M., and Robertson, K. (2001). Effects of the cannabinoid receptor antagonist SR 141716, alone and in combination with dexfenfluramine or naloxone, on food intake in rats.
Psychopharmacology, 159, 111–116.
Russo, E. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage
effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1344–1364.
Ryan, D., Drysdale, A.J., Lafourcade, C., Pertwee, R.G., and Platt, B. (2009). Cannabidiol targets mitochondria to regulate intracellular Ca2+ levels. Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 2053–2063.

CANNABINOIDS AND APPETITE REGULATION

Schwartz, M.W., Woods, S.C., Porte, D. Jr., Seeley, R.J., and Baskin, D.G. (2000). Central nervous system
control of food intake. Nature, 404, 661–671.
Scopinho, A.A., Guimarães, F.S., Corrêa, F.M., and Resstel, L.B. (2011). Cannabidiol inhibits the hyperphagia induced by cannabinoid-1 or serotonin-1A receptor agonists. Pharmacology Biochemistry &
Behavior, 98, 268–272.
Silvestri, C. and Di Marzo, V. (2012). Second generation CB1 receptor blockers and other inhibitors of
peripheral endocannabinoid overactivity and the rationale of their use against metabolic disorders.
Expert Opinion on Investigational Drugs, 21, 1309–1322.
Silvestri, C. and Di Marzo, V. (2013). The endocannabinoid system in energy homeostasis and the aetiopathology of metabolic disorders. Cell Metabolism, 17, 475–490.
Simiand, J., Keane, M., Keane, P.E., and Soubrié, P. (1998). SR 141716, a CB1 cannabinoid receptor antagonist, selectively reduces sweet food intake in marmoset. Behavioural Pharmacology, 9, 179–181.
Sofia, R.D. and Knobloch, L.C. (1976). Comparative effects of various naturally occurring cannabinoids on food, sucrose and water consumption by rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry & Behavior, 4,
591–599.
Soria-Gómez, E., Matias, I., Rueda-Orozco, P.E., et al. (2007). Pharmacological enhancement of the endocannabinoid system in the nucleus accumbens shell stimulates food intake and increases c-Fos expression in the hypothalamus. British Journal of Pharmacology, 151, 1109–1116.
Strasser F., Luftner D., Possinger K., et al. (2006). Comparison of orally administered cannabis extract
and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in treating patients with cancer-related anorexia-cachexia syndrome: a multicenter, phase III, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial from
the Cannabis-In-Cachexia-Study-Group. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 24, 3394–3400.
Sweet, D.C., Levine, A.S., Billington, C.J., and Kotz, C.M. (1999). Feeding response to central orexins.
Brain Research, 821, 535–538.
Timpone, J., Wright, D., Li, N., et al. (1999). The safety and pharmacokinetics of single-agent and combination therapy with megestrol acetate and dronabinol for the treatment of HIV wasting syndrome.
In: G.G. Nahas, K.M. Sutin, D. Harvey, and S. Agurell (eds.). Marihuana and Medicine. Totowa, NJ:
Humana Press, pp. 701–716.
Tisdale, M.J. (2002). Cachexia in cancer patients. Nature Reviews Cancer, 2, 862–871.
Tisdale, M.J. (2009). Mechanisms of cancer cachexia. Physiological Reviews, 89, 381–410.
Thomas, A., Baillie, G.L., Phillips, A.M., Razdan, R.K., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2007). Cannabidiol
displays unexpectedly high potency as an antagonist of CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists in vitro. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 613–623.
Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A., Wease, K.N., et al. (2005). Evidence that the plant cannabinoid
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin is a cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptor antagonist. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 146, 917–926.
Turunen, P.M., Jäntti, M.H., and Kukkonen, J.P. (2012). OX1 orexin/hypocretin receptor signaling
through arachidonic acid and endocannabinoid release. Molecular Pharmacology, 82, 156–167.
Van Sickle, M.D., Oland, L.D., Ho, W., et al. (2001). Cannabinoids inhibit emesis through CB1 receptors
in the brainstem of the ferret. Gastroenterology, 121, 767–774.
Verty, A.N., Singh, M.E., McGregor, I.S., and Mallet, P.E. (2003). The cannabinoid receptor antagonist
SR 141716 attenuates overfeeding induced by systemic or intracranial morphine. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin), 168, 314–323.
Walsh, D., Donnelly, S., and Rybicki, L. (2000). The symptoms of advanced cancer: relationship to age,
gender, and performance status in 1,000 patients. Supportive Care in Cancer, 8, 175–179.
Wang, X., Miyares, R.L., and Ahern, G.P (2005). Oleoylethanolamide excites vagal sensory neurones,
induces visceral pain and reduces short-term food intake in mice via capsaicin receptor TRPV1. Journal
of Physiology, 564, 541–547.

471

472

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Ward, S.J. and Raffa, R.B. (2011). Rimonabant redux and strategies to improve the future outlook of CB1
receptor neutralantagonist/inverse-agonist therapies. Obesity, 19, 1325–1334.
Wiley, J.L., Burston, J.J., Leggett, D.C., et al. (2005). CB1 cannabinoid receptor-mediated modulation of
food intake in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 145, 293–300.
Williams, C.M. and Kirkham, T.C. (2002a). Observational analysis of feeding induced by Delta9-THC and
anandamide. Physiology & Behavior, 76, 241–250.
Williams, C.M. and Kirkham, T.C. (2002b). Reversal of delta 9-THC hyperphagia by SR141716 and naloxone but not dexfenfluramine. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 71, 333–340.
Williams, C.M., Rogers, P.J., and Kirkham, T.C. (1998). Hyperphagia in pre-fed rats following oral delta9THC. Physiology & Behavior, 65, 343–346.
Winters, B.D., Krüger, J.M., Huang, X., et al. (2012). Cannabinoid receptor 1-expressing neurons in the
nucleus accumbens. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109,
E2717–E27125.
Yoshida, R., Ohkuri, T., and Jyotaki, M. (2010). Endocannabinoids selectively enhance sweet taste.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107, 935–939.

Chapter 25

Pain
Barbara Costa and Francesca Comelli

25.1 Introduction
Marijuana has been used to treat chronic pain for thousands of years (Burns and Ineck 2006;
Murray et al. 2007). However, the widespread use of medical marijuana is still controversial
because the plant produces both therapeutic and psychoactive effects. This chapter focuses on the
antinociceptive properties of phytocannabinoids, with emphasis on chronic pathological pain,
such as neuropathic pain. Indeed, acute pain is well controlled by actual therapies, whereas chronic pain is still often refractory to conventional pharmacotherapies, necessitating the development
and validation of novel analgesics. The preclinical evidence obtained in well-characterized animal
models of pathological pain, contributes to the hypothesis that one of the most promising therapeutic uses of phytocannabinoids in humans is their employment as pain killers.

25.2 Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) has been tested in a wide range of antinociceptive assays.
It has been demonstrated as effective in producing antinociception in both phasic (e.g., tail-flick
and hot-plate tests) and tonic (e.g., abdominal stretch test) nociceptive assays and, actually, there
are a wide range of animal models of acute and tonic pain in which THC exhibits antinociceptive
activity, when administered orally, systemically, or directly into the brain or spinal cord (see Costa
2007 for review and Table 25.1).
One of the major obstacles in developing THC as a medicine is its cannabimimetic side effect
profile. Various approaches have been suggested in order to overcome this issue. One of these
approaches is the addition of cannabidiol (CBD) as well as of other phytocannabinoids (see section 25.7). Also cannabinoids, which stimulate cannabinoid type 2 receptors (CB2), can further
separate analgesic activity from cannabimimetic psychotropic activity. Since THC is a mixed cannabinoid CB1/CB2 receptor agonist, some studies evaluated the effectiveness of this compound in
pathological pain, in which the CB2 receptor plays a pivotal role (it is distributed in peripheral tissues and inhibits the release of inflammatory mediators that excite nociceptors), such as chronic
inflammatory pain. In the rat model of Freund’s adjuvant-induced chronic arthritic pain (CFA),
it was shown that, although THC is equipotent and equiefficacious in nonarthritic and arthritic
rats, the antinociceptive effects of THC in arthritic rats are produced via activation of both cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors, whereas in nonarthritic rats, THC appears to produce antinociception via cannabinoid CB1 receptor activation only (Cox et al. 2007a). One might hypothesize
from such data that chronic pain such as that experienced by arthritics has two distinct, but
interacting components that involve both cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors. Another possible
strategy would be to induce antinociception with a peripherally restricted cannabinoid receptor
agonist. Indeed, CT-3 (ajulemic acid), a synthetic analogue of a metabolite of THC, binds with

474

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Table 25.1 Studies demonstrating the analgesic effect of THC in animal models
(see Costa 2007 for review and references)
Acute pain

Tonic/chronic pain

Hot plate

Abdominal stretch test
(phenylbenzoquinone into peritoneum)

Tail flick

Acetic or formic acid into peritoneum

Randall–Selitto paw pressure

Freund’s adjuvant into hind paw

Flinch jump

Formalin into hind paw

Electrically stimulated sciatic nerve

Capsaicin

Tooth pulp

Loose ligation of sciatic nerve

Skin-twitch reflex

Stretching

high affinity to human CB1 and CB2 receptors and has potent antihyperalgesic activity in models of chronic neuropathic and inflammatory pain in the rat which is mediated only by the CB1
receptor subtype (Dyson et al. 2005). Its weak psycho-activity is due to the pharmacokinetics of
the compound which has a partially restricted entry into the central nervous system with brain
levels reaching only 30–40% of peak plasma levels following oral administration (Dyson et al.
2005). These and other findings (Fox et al. 2001; Ibrahim et al. 2003) suggest: (1) that it is possible
to induce a significant relief of chronic pain through the activation of peripheral CB1 and (2) that
the CB2 contribution to chronic pain relief is essentially due to its expression on microglial cells
within the spinal cord. Unexpectedly, concerning neuropathic pain, there is only one report showing an antihyperalgesic effect of THC, when it is administered intrathecally to rats with neuropathic pain (Mao et al. 2000). There is a more recent paper showing the ability of THC to alleviate
diabetic neuropathy; THC showed a significantly higher antinociceptive effect at a dose of 50 mg/
kg orally (p.o.) in diabetic mice versus nondiabetic mice (Williams et al. 2008). There is no doubt
that THC is a potent analgesic, but the findings that THC-induced antinociception is mediated
principally through the activation of CB1 receptors accounts for the concomitant behavioral side
effects that hinder its use. This is probably why the effectiveness of THC against neuropathic pain
has been so little investigated. The obvious consequence has been the attempt to use low doses of
THC, especially in combination with other analgesics. Consistent with this approach many studies explored the combination of THC in low, nonpsychoactive doses, with opioids. The idea is
that, since THC acts synergistically with opioids as an opioid-sparing agent, combined low-dose
administration of THC with an opioid would produce pain relief with fewer side effects than
those produced by analgesic doses of each of these drugs when they are administered alone. Low
doses of THC were found to significantly enhance morphine-induced antinociception in the tailflick test in the mouse when both were administered intrathecally (Welch and Stevens 1992), and
intracerebroventricular administration of both drugs resulted in an enhancement of morphineinduced antinociception (Welch et al. 1995). It was further established that THC enhanced the
potency of morphine in any subcutaneous (s.c.)–p.o. combination in mice in the tail-flick test,
and that both given s.c. enhanced the potency of morphine in mice for its inhibition of paw
withdrawal to radiant heat (Smith et al. 1998). The enhancement of both morphine- and codeineinduced antinociception by THC, administered p.o., was found to be a synergistic rather than an
additive interaction, as indicated by isobolographic analysis (Cichewicz and McCarthy 2003).

Pain

The clinical utility of such combinations has yet to be studied, but has the possibility of producing
effective pain relief with a decrease in side effects, not the least of which is tolerance to both cannabinoids and opioids, as demonstrated in acute pain models utilizing the drugs in combination:
tolerance to morphine was prevented in groups of animals receiving a daily cotreatment with a
nonanalgesic dose of THC (Cichewicz and Welch 2003). Importantly, morphine-tolerant mice
were more sensitive to the acute antinociceptive effects of THC, suggesting no cross-tolerance
development (Cichewicz and Welch 2003). The same research group reported that morphine
and THC exhibit synergy in the expression of antinociception in chronic pain models, too (Cox
et al. 2007b). Particularly in chronic inflammatory pain a THC/morphine combination results
both in a synergistic antinociceptive interaction in both normal and arthritic rats and in less
tolerance development (Cox et al. 2007b). Also, morphine-induced antinociception is significantly enhanced by THC in both nondiabetic and diabetic mice, although the enhancement was
found to be greatest in degree in diabetic mice (Williams et al. 2008). Interestingly, morphine was
found to release both leu-enkephalin and β-endorphin in nondiabetic rats, but failed to release
these endogenous opioids in diabetic rats, whereas THC did induce release of dynorphin and
leu-enkephalin in diabetic rats (Williams et al. 2008), suggesting that diabetes itself may affect
the ability of morphine to release endogenous opioids and produce analgesia in diabetic models
of pain. In summary, many preclinical findings suggest that cannabinoid/opioid therapy may be
able to produce long-term antinociceptive effects at doses devoid of substantial side effects, while
avoiding production of the neuronal biochemical changes that give rise to tolerance. A critical
future direction is the evaluation of the clinical utility of such a combination. In particular, the
potential pharmacokinetics and the safety of the combination in humans are unknown.

25.3 Cannabidiol
Interest in exploiting the therapeutic properties of CBD was initially focused on its interactions
with the main psychotropic constituent of Cannabis sativa, THC. However, the past several
years have seen a growing interest in CBD per se because of the discovery of its antioxidant,
anti-­inflammatory, and neuroprotective effects, all of which are produced independently of
the ­cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors (Izzo et al. 2009; De Petrocellis and Di Marzo 2010).
Concerning pain, the analgesic effectiveness of CBD was firstly assessed in mice using the aceticinduced writhing model and in rats submitted to hot-plate tests and the Randall–Selitto paw
pressure test (Sofia et al. 1975). This study demonstrated no analgesic effect of CBD, and this
lack of efficacy was then confirmed in the acetic acid abdominal constriction test (Sanders et al.
1979). Conversely, CBD was found effective in the phenylbenzoquinone (PBQ)-induced mouse
writhing test (model of peripheral pain), when given orally 20 min before the intraperitoneal (i.p.)
injection of PBQ (Formukong et al. 1988). These conflicting results suggested that CBD is ineffective against acute pain, but is effective against pathological pain. As a consequence, the analgesic
properties of CBD were tested in models of persistent and inflammatory pain with conflicting
results. In fact, Costa et al. (2004a) reported that in inflammatory conditions, CBD had potent
antihyperalgesic activity; only 1 h after single, very low doses, CBD abolished the hyperalgesia
which develops in the rat paw after carrageenan injection. In a subsequent paper, the same group
showed that the antihyperalgesic effect of CBD in the carrageenan model of inflammatory pain
was mediated by transient receptor potential (TRP)V1 and did not involve the cannabinoid
receptor subtypes CB1 and CB2 (Costa et al. 2004b), highlighting: (1) the ability of CBD to target
receptors different from CB1 and CB2 for which it displays poor affinity and (2) the effectiveness
of CBD in relieving pain in pathological conditions. In the same year it was reported that CBD

475

476

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

failed to reduce the first and second phases of formalin-evoked nociceptive behavior (Finn et al.
2004), and, in line with this finding, a more recent report by Booker et al. (2009) demonstrated
that CBD did not affect abdominal stretching, a model of visceral pain, suggesting, again, that
although CBD lacks antinociceptive activity in animal models of acute and tonic pain, it may have
therapeutic use in chronic pathological pain, such as inflammatory and neuropathic hyperalgesia.
The first report showing the effectiveness of CBD in pathological inflammatory and neuropathic
pain was from our research group (Costa et al. 2007); in our hands CBD was able to reduce hyperalgesic responses to thermal and mechanical stimuli when repeatedly administered at 20 mg/kg
to CFA-injected and to neuropathic rats via an oral route. Interestingly, the antihyperalgesic effect
of CBD was prevented by the vanilloid antagonist capsazepine but not by cannabinoid receptor
antagonists, indicating the pivotal role of the TRPV1 receptor in CBD-induced relief of neuropathic pain. Thereafter, CBD was also shown effective in relieving neuropathic pain induced in
rats by the antineoplastic drug, paclitaxel, when administered i.p. daily at 5–10 mg/kg for 2 weeks
(Ward et al. 2011). Of interest, CBD completely prevented the development of paclitaxel-induced
cold and mechanical allodynia, with no latent neuropathy emerging after the cessation of CBD
treatment (Ward et al. 2011). These authors didn’t investigate the potential mechanisms underlying CBD’s effectiveness, but did suggest that the effect could be related to the potency it displays
at lowering the levels of key proinflammatory cytokines, because paclitaxel has been shown to
increase the expression of such cytokines. Peripheral neuropathy is a common complication
occurring during diabetes and its management is often inadequate and unsatisfactory. CBD was
found to ameliorate neuropathic pain in streptozotocin-diabetic CD1 mice after intranasal dosing (Toth et al. 2010). In this experimental setting CBD administered at the onset of diabetes
and prior to identified neuropathic pain, limited the development of later neuropathic pain and
this effect was mediated by CB2 receptors (Toth et al. 2010). Taken together, these findings have
demonstrated broad-spectrum antinociceptive properties of CBD in different models of painful
neuropathy. Concerning the mechanism of action, over the last years, several potential alternative
pharmacological targets for CBD have been proposed, often based solely on pharmacological evidence obtained in vitro. Indeed, the most intriguing properties of CBD are related to its capability
to interact pharmacologically with various receptors/systems, including those involved in pain
modulation. Table 25.2 summarizes the molecular targets of CBD which could be responsible for
the analgesic properties of this phytocannabinoid.
On the basis of these observations, a recent study has provided evidence suggesting that CBD
and its analogue dehydroxyl-CBD (DH-CBD), suppress neuropathic pain in rats with spinal
nerve ligation, by targeting the α3 glycine receptor (Xiong et al. 2012). Both CBD and DH-CBDinduced analgesic effects were significantly reduced in mice lacking the α3 glycine receptor but not
in mice lacking CB1 and CB2 receptors. Furthermore, structural and functional analysis revealed
that the magnitude of the CBD and DH-CBD-induced analgesic effects correlated with their
potentiation of the α3 glycine receptor but not with their binding affinity for CB1 and CB2 receptors. Spinal α3 glycine receptors have been proposed as an important target for pain treatment.
However, α3 glycine receptor-based therapeutic agents are not yet available for the treatment of
chronic pain or other diseases. The preclinical data obtained by Xiong and colleagues, together
with findings showing that several phytocannabinoids, including THC and CBD, can potentiate
glycine currents (IGly) in native neurons isolated from the ventral tegmental area, amygdala,
hippocampus, and spinal cord (Ahrens et al. 2009), suggest that “glycinergic phytocannabinoids”
are ideal therapeutic agents for the treatment of neuropathic pain. It was also found that the CBD
derivative O-1602, which is a GPR55 agonist, was able to reduce joint afferent mechanosensitivity in an acute model of joint inflammation (Schuelert and McDougall 2011). The desensitizing

Pain

Table 25.2 Proposed molecular targets of CBD
Receptor/enzyme

Activity

Reference

CB1

Antagonist

Thomas et al. 2007

CB2

Agonist/inverse agonist

Thomas et al. 2007

Fatty acid amide hydrolase

Inhibition

Ligresti et al. 2006

GPR55

Antagonist

Ryberg et al. 2007

α1 and α1β glycine receptors

Positive allosteric modulator

Ahrens et al. 2009

μ and δ opioid receptor

Positive allosteric modulator

Kathmann et al. 2006

TRPA1

Agonist

De Petrocellis et al. 2008

TRPM8

Antagonist

De Petrocellis et al. 2008

TRPV1

Agonist

De Petrocellis et al. 2008

TRPV2

Agonist

Qin et al. 2008

5-HT1A

Direct agonist
Indirect agonist

Russo et al. 2005
Rock et al. 2012

Abnormal-CBD receptor

Antagonist

Walter et al. 2003

effect of O-1602 was abolished by coadministration of the abnormal cannabidiol receptor/GPR55
antagonist O-1918, while pretreatment with CB1 and CB2 receptor antagonists had no effect on
O-1602 responses. Thus, O-1602 appears to act on GPR55 receptors to inhibit peripheral sensitization of joint nociceptors (Schuelert and McDougall 2011). A role for GPR55 in nociceptive
signaling is corroborated by the finding that this receptor is highly expressed by mouse primary
sensory neurons and by evidence indicating that GPR55 knockout mice do not develop mechanical hyperalgesia in response to inflammatory or neuropathic insults (Staton et al. 2008). While
the investigation by Schuelert and McDougall indicates an antinociceptive role for GPR55, pain
behavioral studies need to be carried out to ascertain whether activation of this receptor can
truly produce analgesia. The capability of CBD to behave as a positive allosteric modulator of
μ and δ opioid receptors (Kathmann et al. 2006) indicates that CBD could potentially enhance
the analgesic effects of opiates. Even though this effect is produced only by high concentrations
of CBD in vitro, it is possible that in neuropathic pain conditions in vivo, modulation of opioid
receptor activity by CBD could contribute to its analgesic effect, a hypothesis that has, however,
yet to be explored. Further molecular mechanisms that could explain CBD-induced relief of
neuropathic pain include TRPA1/TRPV2/TRPV1 activation/desensitization (De Petrocellis et
al. 2008; Qin et al. 2008), as well as TRPM8 antagonism. Many studies in mice deficient in TRP
channels indicate that TRP channels may play a crucial role in the hypersensitivity to thermal,
chemical and mechanical stimuli that is associated with neuropathies. The stimulating effects of
CBD at TRPA1, TRPV1, and TRPV2 result in the desensitization of these channels (De Petrocellis
et al. 2011). Desensitization might have important consequences for the potential use of CBD as
a therapeutic agent in those disorders, such as chronic and inflammatory pain, in which these
channels have been shown to be implicated and to play a permissive role. TRPA1, TRPV1, and
TRPV2 antagonists are of course also effective against pain. However, the antinociception exerted
through TRP channel desensitization should be devoid of the unwanted effects typically induced

477

478

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

by TRP channel blockade (Vay et al. 2012; Wong and Gavva 2009). In addition, TRPM8 has
emerged as a sensory transducer contributing to pain hypersensitivity associated with neuro­
pathy since it is strongly expressed in C- and possibly Aδ-fibers (Kobayashi et al. 2005), and very
probably in a subset of cells different from those expressing TRPV1 (Appendino et al. 2008). It is
noteworthy, therefore, that CBD is a TRPM8 antagonist, since this action could contribute to its
ability to induce antinociception. Finally, the functions of certain serotonin receptors, including
5-HT2A, 5-HT2B, 5-HT4, and 5-HT1A, are profoundly affected by neuropathic pain (Aira et al.
2010; Nitanda et al. 2005), and a selective 5-HT1A agonist has very recently been found to potently
depress evoked field potentials in neuropathic rats (Aira et al. 2010), revealing another possible
mechanism by which CBD might induce analgesia: direct or indirect activation of 5-HT1A receptors (Table 25.2). In addition, evidence for the involvement of adenosine A1 receptors in CBDinduced antinociception was recently obtained in experiments with rats (Maione et al. 2011).
Thus, injections of CBD directly into the ventrolateral periaqueductal gray (vl-PAG) produced
antinociceptive responses in the tail-flick test accompanied, in this brain area, by a decrease in
the ongoing activity of ON neurons, as expected, and also, paradoxically, by a decrease in the
ongoing activity of OFF neurons, effects that were antagonized by selective antagonists of cannabinoid CB1, adenosine A1, and TRPA1 receptors, although not of TRPV1 receptors. That these
effects of CBD on the vl-PAG were mediated by CB1 and adenosine A1 receptors, as well as by
TRPA1 receptors could explain why this compound inhibited ongoing activity of both ON and
OFF neurons. Importantly, neuropathic pain is associated with microglial activation in the spinal
cord and brain and the subsequent release of proinflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-6,
interleukin-1β, and tumor necrosis factor α. The etiology of neuropathic pain, which is common
in cancer, diabetes, multiple sclerosis, and peripheral nerve injury, is poorly understood, but
recent evidence indicates that increased reactive oxygen species generation by microglial cells is
a critical initiating factor. Thus, the antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of CBD could
strongly contribute to its potent effect upon neuropathic pain. In fact, CBD was shown to inhibit
activated microglial cell migration by antagonizing an abnormal cannabidiol-sensitive receptor
(Walter et al. 2003). CBD is also a competitive inhibitor, with an IC50 in the nanomolar range, of
adenosine uptake by the equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1 of macrophages and microglial
cells and it has been shown to have potent actions in attenuating oxidative and nitrosative stress
(Carrier et al. 2006; Pan et al. 2009). Furthermore, the antinociceptive effects of CBD in diabetic
mice were associated with a restriction in elevation of microglial density and p38 MAPK activity in the dorsal spinal cord (Toth et al. 2010). Altogether, these observations strongly suggest
that CBD attenuates chronic pain not through a single mechanism, but rather by acting through
several mechanisms on both neuronal and non-neuronal cells. This pharmacological profile,
together with its lack of psychotropic side effects, makes this phytocannabinoid a strong candidate
for pathological pain treatment.

25.4 Tetrahydrocannabivarin
Tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV) is the propyl homolog of THC and behaves as a potent CB2
receptor partial agonist in vitro and as an antagonist and/or inverse agonist of the CB1 receptor both in vitro and in vivo (Pertwee 2008). This it does with relatively high potency and in a
manner that is both tissue and ligand dependent. This peculiar pharmacological profile may be
of great interest in the employment of THCV against pain for at least two reasons. The first is
the evidence indicating that CB1 antagonists/inverse agonists can reduce pain hypersensitivity
as well as CB1 agonists, even if only in chronic pathological conditions, characterized by altered

Pain

endocannabinoid tone and by the presence of regulatory changes in cannabinoid receptors or in
other related systems (vanilloid). In fact, it has been shown that repeated administration of the
CB1 antagonist/inverse agonist, rimonabant, is effective in alleviating thermal and mechanical
hyperalgesia in two rat models of neuropathic pain (Comelli et al. 2010; Costa et al. 2005) and
that this effectiveness could be due to its blockade of the constitutive activity of the CB1 receptor
which maintains the TRPV1 channel in a sensitized state responsive to noxious chemical stimuli
(Fioravanti et al. 2008). The second is the emerging evidence for a role for the CB2 receptor in
chronic pain modulation. Thus, there have been reports that CB2 receptor agonists are effective against many types of pain: inﬂammatory, neuropathic, postsurgical, and cancer pain (see
Atwood and Mackie 2010 for review). It is still unclear as to where these CB2 agonists exert their
analgesic effects, one likely possibility being microglia, since it is currently not clear whether
CB2 receptors are expressed by neurons involved in the process of nociception. Accordingly, the
effectiveness of THCV as pain killer could be due to its combined activation of CB2 receptors and
blockade of CB1 receptors. It is noteworthy that THCV has been found to behave in vivo, although
not in vitro, as a CB1 receptor agonist at doses above those at which it produces signs of CB1 receptor blockade (Pertwee et al. 2007). Thus, THCV displays antihyperalgesic activity in carrageenan
and formalin models of inﬂammatory pain in mice, the first of these effects being signiﬁcantly
attenuated by SR144528, and the second not only by this CB2 receptor-selective antagonist, but
also by the CB1 receptor-selective antagonist, rimonabant (Bolognini et al. 2010). On the basis of
these findings it would also be of interest to explore the possibility that this compound can suppress chronic inﬂammatory, or indeed, neuropathic pain, conditions characterized by a strong
CB2 involvement. A further important property has been recently reported for THCV that augments the interest in testing this phytocannabinoid as a chronic pain reliever: THCV stimulated
and desensitized TRPV1 and TRPV2 receptors (De Petrocellis et al. 2011) whose involvement in
pain has been already discussed in section 25.3.

25.5 Cannabigerol
Cannabigerol (CBG) is a little-studied phytocannabinoid that was detected in cannabis in 1964
and subsequently found not to induce THC-like psychopharmacological effects in vivo. However,
it does possess some ability to interact with the endocannabinoid system since it behaves as a
CB1 receptor antagonist at nanomolar concentrations (Cascio et al. 2010) and as an anandamide
reuptake inhibitor at concentrations in the low micromolar range (Ligresti et al. 2006). The search
for CBG targets led to the discovery that CBG can activate TRPA1 transient receptor potential channels and block the activation of TRPM8 transient receptor potential channels in vitro
(De Petrocellis et al. 2008). A recent study directed at determining CBG affinity for a variety of
receptors showed, in in vitro experiments, that CBG is a potent α2-adrenoceptor agonist (Cascio
et al. 2010). This was unexpected considering the structure of this phytocannabinoid and as no
other cannabinoid has been reported to behave in this way. In the same study evidence was also
obtained that CBG can block 5-HT1A and cannabinoid CB1 receptors, albeit with a potency lower
than that with which it appears to activate α2-adrenoceptors (Cascio et al. 2010). These observations open up the possibility that CBG, like established α2-adrenoceptor agonists (for example,
clonidine), could display significant efficacy as an antinociceptive agent when administered in
vivo. We tested this hypothesis by assessing the antinociceptive properties of CBG in two different
murine models of pain, the formalin and the λ-carrageenan tests. More specifically, we showed for
the first time that CBG was able to reduce in a dose-dependent manner (1, 5, 10 mg/kg, i.p.) both
the first and the second nocifensive phase associated with the intraplantar injection of formalin,

479

480

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

and to reduce λ-carrageenan-evoked hypersensitivity. The antinociceptive effects of CBG were
comparable with those evoked by clonidine and antagonism studies directed at investigating
the mechanism of action underlying these effects suggested that α2 receptors contributed to the
antinociceptive effects evoked by CBG in both animal models (Comelli et al. 2012). However, it
is possible that part of the CBG-induced relief of inflammatory and tonic pain is also due to its
ability to decrease inactivation of the endocannabinoid, anandamide (Ligresti et al. 2006), thereby
augmenting endogenous antinociceptive tone. In the light of the α2-adrenoceptor-mediated
mechanism for CBG-induced relief of pain, it is possible that CBG can synergistically interact
with other cannabinoids. In fact, an interaction between synthetic cannabinoids, i.e., WIN55,2122 and CP55,940, and α2-adrenoceptor agonists has already been demonstrated. Particularly, spinal
combination of WIN 55,212–2 with clonidine or neostigmine can augment the antinociceptive
effect of each drug alone, in both an acute nociceptive state and a tissue-injury state evoked by formalin stimulus (Yoon and Choi 2003). In addition, CP55,940 combined with an α2-adrenoceptor
agonist showed simple additivity in the tail flick assay, but synergy in the hot-plate assay, indicating that the synergism may be specific to the spinal and supraspinal pathways involved in each
type of acute pain stimulus (Tham et al. 2005). The ability of CBG to counteract chronic pain,
including neuropathic pain, alone or in combination with other phytocannabinoids (i.e., THC, as
already suggested (Pertwee 2009)), awaits investigation.

25.6 Cannabichromene
Despite the presence of cannabichromene (CBC) in certain marijuana strains, relatively few
studies have investigated the pharmacological effects of this compound. CBC has been shown
to have analgesic properties and to potentiate the analgesic effect of THC in the mouse tail-flick
assay (Davis and Hatoum 1983). More recently it has been shown that CBC produced significant
pharmacological effects only when administered at a high dose (i.e., 100 mg/kg, intravenously
(i.v.)), which consistently produced locomotor suppression, catalepsy, and hypothermia, but only
occasionally produced a small magnitude of antinociception (DeLong et al. 2010). Interestingly,
administration of a threshold dose of THC produced leftward shifts in the CBC dose–response
curve for antinociception, suggesting a possible synergism between these two phytocannabinoids.
Additionally, CBC was comparable to mustard oil in stimulating TRPA1-mediated increases in
intracellular Ca2+ in human embryonic kidney 293 cells (50–60 nM) (De Petrocellis et al. 2008).
CBC recently proved to be a strong anandamide uptake inhibitor (De Petrocellis et al. 2011). Like
CBD, CBC produced tail-flick-related antinociceptive responses accompanied by the expected
decrease in ON cell ongoing activity and by a paradoxical decrease of OFF cell ongoing activity,
in the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM) after intra-vl-PAG injections (Maione et al. 2011),
indicative of a supraspinal mechanism of action. These effects were antagonized not only by a CB1
receptor antagonist, but also by the selective adenosine A1 receptor antagonist DPCPX (Maione
et al. 2011), suggesting that the antinociceptive effects of CBC might be the result of sequential
or simultaneous activation of different targets. In light of its nonpsychotropic activity (El-Alfy
et al. 2010), CBC is a good candidate for testing in combination with other phytocannabinoids
for the relief of pain.

25.7 Phytocannabinoid mixtures and cannabis extracts
There is growing evidence supporting the therapeutic usage of whole extracts of cannabis for
pain relief; these might offer a number of advantages over pure cannabinoids. The most notable
examples are Sativex®, which contains THC/CBD in an approximately 1:1 ratio, and GW-2000-02,

Pain

which contains primarily THC, for the relief of pain from brachial-plexus avulsion, a human
model of central neuropathic pain, and of pain associated with multiple sclerosis (Berman et al.
2004; Rog et al. 2005). Whole-plant extracts contain a complex mixture of natural cannabinoids
and other noncannabinoid compounds that may interact synergistically to provide a superior
therapeutic proﬁle over that of single pure components of cannabis. This may explain why a
cannabis-based medicine made from whole-plant extracts may be more effective than single
cannabinoid products (e.g., Sofia et al. 1975; Varvel et al. 2006). In addition to potentiating the
pharmacological efﬁcacy of cannabinoids, the use of standardized extracts could also decrease the
adverse effects following in vivo administration. This could be true for many phytocannabinoidinduced effects, especially analgesia, since phytocannabinoids exert antinociceptive effects via
different mechanisms, as described in this chapter. The first study exploring the potential of
combining phytocannabinoids for pain relief dated from 1975 when the analgesic effectiveness of
THC, a crude marijuana extract (CME), and cannabinol (CBN) following oral administration was
directly compared in mice using the acetic-induced writhing and hot-plate tests and the Randall–
Selitto paw pressure test in rats. In terms of THC content, CME was nearly equipotent in the hotplate and Randall–Selitto tests, but was three times more potent in the acetic acid writhing test.
On the other hand, CBN was only effective in reducing writhing frequency in mice and raising the
pain threshold of the inflamed hind paws of rats. The results of this investigation seem to suggest
that CME possesses higher potency because it contains more than one active compound (Sofia
et al. 1975). In spite of these early studies, further investigations in this area were not reported
until a few years ago, when the contribution of CBD, other cannabinoids, terpenes, and ﬂavonoids
to the clinical effect of cannabis was espoused as an “entourage effect” (Russo and McPartland
2003), and, more recently, evidence has been presented indicating a potentiation of THC’s antinociceptive effect by a high dose of CBD (Varvel et al. 2006). Particularly, this study showed that
i.v. administered CBD (30 mg/kg) did potentiate the antinociceptive effect of a threshold dose
of THC assessed in the mouse tail-flick test, suggesting there may be some therapeutic benefit of
adding high doses of CBD to THC for pain management. However, effects of THC on locomotor
activity, catalepsy, and hypothermia were also increased by CBD. In addition CBD was reported
not to alter the antinociceptive effects of THC in the formalin test in rats (Finn et al. 2004). In our
opinion, the ability of CBD to potentiate the antinociceptive effects of THC in animals may be
sensitive to the particular pain model used and could be particularly relevant in chronic pathological pain; furthermore, we can suggest that other substances contained in the plant and not only
the two main constituents (CBD and THC) can explain the overall therapeutic effect of the herb.
This was demonstrated in a neuropathic pain model: a standardized extract of Cannabis sativa,
containing a large quantity of CBD and a small percentage of THC and other minor cannabinoid
and noncannabinoid components, evoked a total relief of thermal hyperalgesia, exceeding the
effects of single cannabinoids (Comelli et al. 2008). Thus, repeated treatment with only CBD or
only THC, administered at the same dose present in the extract, displayed only a partial effect and
a lack of efﬁcacy on nociceptive behavior, respectively. The difference between antinociceptive
responses to the pure cannabinoids and to the extract prompted the hypothesis that this could be
solely due to the combination of CBD and THC in the extract. Therefore, a mixture was tested
which did not contain any noncannabinoid compounds or additional phytocannabinoids, apart
from THC and CBD at the same doses as present in the extract; it evoked an antihyperalgesic
effect lower than that elicited by the extract, suggesting that other constituents present in the plant
account for the greater efﬁcacy of the extract (Comelli et al. 2008). In the perspective of a possible
future therapeutic employment of Cannabis sativa extracts, it will be crucial to characterize more
completely their constituents, including THCV, CBG, and CBC, whose antinociceptive properties

481

482

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

have been described previously in this chapter (sections 25.4–25.6). Although the spectrum of
the antinociceptive effects of these compounds is largely unexplored, and, although they tend to
be present both in different amounts in samples of marijuana of different origins and in lower
amounts than THC, there is growing evidence that some of them constitute new and attractive
tools for pain management, especially in combination. Another intriguing idea is that terpenoids
present in the plant could be responsible for the greater antinociception produced by some cannabis plant extracts than by single phytocannabinoids (Russo 2011). Particularly, β-caryophyllene
is generally the most common sesquiterpenoid encountered in cannabis and it is frequently the
predominant terpenoid overall in cannabis extracts. It displays anti-inflammatory and analgesic
activity, and selectively binds to the CB2 receptor (Ki = 155 ± 4 nM) behaving as a functional
CB2 agonist (Gertsch et al. 2008). Further research is required to better characterize synergistic
pharmacological interactions between some of the constituents of cannabis, not least because this
could lead to the discovery of improved new treatments for pain.

25.8 Conclusions and future directions
Together, the preclinical data on the antinociceptive properties of phytocannabinoids summarized in this chapter strongly suggest that the possibility exists of developing new effective medications for pain relief that contain one or more phytocannabinoids, alone or in combination with
other constituents of cannabis, and that display favorable benefit-to-risk ratios. Thus, the rational
use of cannabis-based medications for alleviating the suffering of patients caused by severe pain
deserves serious consideration.

References
Ahrens, J., Demir, R., Leuwer, M., et al. (2009). The nonpsychotropic cannabinoid cannabidiol modulates and directly activates alpha-1 and alpha-1-Beta glycine receptor function. Pharmacology, 83(4),
217–222.
Aira, Z., Buesa, I., Salgueiro, M., et al. (2010). Subtype-specific changes in 5-HT receptor-mediated modulation of C fibre-evoked spinal field potentials are triggered by peripheral nerve injury. Neuroscience,
168(3), 831–841.
Appendino, G., Minassi, A., Pagani, A., and Ech-Chahad, A. (2008). The role of natural products in the
ligand deorphanization of TRP channels. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 14(1), 2–17.
Atwood, B.K. and Mackie, K. (2010). CB2: a cannabinoid receptor with an identity crisis. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 160(3), 467–479.
Berman, J.S., Symonds, C., and Birch, R. (2004). Efﬁcacy of two cannabis based medicinal extracts for
relief of central neuropathic pain from brachial plexus avulsion: results of a randomised controlled trial.
Pain, 112(3), 299–306.
Bolognini, D., Costa, B., Maione, S., et al. (2010). The plant cannabinoid Delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin
can decrease signs of inflammation and inflammatory pain in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology,
160(3), 677–687.
Booker, L., Naidu, P.S., Razdan, R.K., Mahadevan, A., and Lichtman, A.H. (2009). Evaluation of prevalent phytocannabinoids in the acetic acid model of visceral nociception. Drug and Alcohol Dependence,
105(1–2), 42–47.
Burns, T.L. and Ineck, J.R. (2006). Cannabinoid analgesia as a potential new therapeutic option in the
treatment of chronic pain. The Annals of Pharmacotherapy, 40(2), 251–260.
Carrier, E.J., Auchampach, J.A., and Hillard, C.J. (2006). Inhibition of an equilibrative nucleoside transporter by cannabidiol: a mechanism of cannabinoid immunosuppression. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103(20), 7895–7900.

Pain

Cascio, M.G., Gauson, L.A., Stevenson, L.A., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2010). Evidence that the
plant cannabinoid cannabigerol is a highly potent alpha2-adrenoceptor agonist and moderately potent
5HT1A receptor antagonist. British Journal of Pharmacology, 159(1), 129–141.
Cichewicz, D.L. and McCarthy, E.A. (2003). Antinociceptive synergy between delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol
and opioids after oral administration. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 304(3),
1010–1015.
Cichewicz, D.L. and Welch, S.P. (2003). Modulation of oral morphine antinociceptive tolerance and
­naloxone-precipitated withdrawal signs by oral Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of Pharmacology
and Experimental Therapeutics, 305(3), 812–817.
Comelli, F., Bettoni, I., Colombo, A., Fumagalli, P., Giagnoni, G., and Costa, B. (2010). Rimonabant, a
cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist, attenuates mechanical allodynia and counteracts oxidative stress
and nerve growth factor deficit in diabetic mice. European Journal of Pharmacology, 637(1–3), 62–69.
Comelli, F., Filippi, G., Papaleo, E., De Gioia, L., Pertwee, R.G., and Costa, B. (2012). Evidence that
the phytocannabinoid cannabigerol can induce antinociception by activating α2-adrenoreceptors: a
computational and pharmacological study. Proceedings 22nd Annual Symposium on the Cannabinoids.
International Cannabinoid Research Society: Freiburg, Germany, p. 44
Comelli, F., Giagnoni, G., Bettoni, I., Colleoni, M., and Costa, B. (2008). Antihyperalgesic effect of
a Cannabis sativa extract in a rat model of neuropathic pain: mechanisms involved. Phytotherapy
Research, 22(8), 1017–1024.
Costa, B. (2007). On the pharmacological properties of Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Chemistry &
Biodiversity, 4(8), 1664–1677.
Costa, B., Colleoni, M., Conti, S., et al. (2004a). Oral anti-inflammatory activity of cannabidiol, a non-­
psychoactive constituent of cannabis, in acute carrageenan-induced inflammation in the rat paw.
Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Archives of Pharmacology, 369(3), 294–299.
Costa, B., Giagnoni, G., Franke, C., Trovato, A.E., and Colleoni, M. (2004b). Vanilloid TRPV1 receptor
mediates the antihyperalgesic effect of the nonpsychoactive cannabinoid, cannabidiol, in a rat model of
acute inflammation. British Journal of Pharmacology, 143(2), 247–250.
Costa, B., Trovato, A.E., Comelli, F., Giagnoni, G., and Colleoni, M. (2007). The non-psychoactive cannabis constituent cannabidiol is an orally effective therapeutic agent in rat chronic inflammatory and
neuropathic pain. European Journal of Pharmacology, 556(1–3), 75–83.
Costa, B., Trovato, A.E., Colleoni, M., Giagnoni, G., Zarini, E., and Croci, T. (2005). Effect of the cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist, SR141716, on nociceptive response and nerve demyelination in rodents
with chronic constriction injury of the sciatic nerve. Pain, 116(1–2), 52–61.
Cox, M.L., Haller, V.L., and Welch, S.P. (2007a). The antinociceptive effect of Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol in the arthritic rat involves the CB2 cannabinoid receptor. European Journal of
Pharmacology, 570(1–3), 50–56.
Cox, M.L., Haller, V.L., and Welch, S.P. (2007b). Synergy between delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol and morphine in the arthritic rat. European Journal of Pharmacology, 567(1–2), 125–130.
Davis, W.M. and Hatoum, N.S. (1983). Neurobehavioral actions of cannabichromene and interactions with
delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol. General Pharmacology, 14(2), 247–252.
DeLong, G.T., Wolf, C.E., Poklis, A., and Lichtman, A.H. (2010). Pharmacological evaluation of the natural constituent of Cannabis sativa, cannabichromene and its modulation by Δ(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol.
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 112(1–2), 126–133.
De Petrocellis, L. and Di Marzo, V. (2010). Non-CB1, non-CB2 receptors for endocannabinoids, plant cannabinoids, and synthetic cannabimimetics: focus on G-protein-coupled receptors and transient receptor
potential channels. Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology, 5(1), 103–21.
De Petrocellis, L., Ligresti, A., and Schiano-Moriello, A., et al. (2011). Effects of cannabinoids and cannabinoidenriched Cannabis extracts on TRP channels and endocannabinoid metabolic enzymes. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 163(7), 1479–1494.

483

484

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

De Petrocellis, L., Vellani, V., Schiano-Moriello, A., et al. (2008). Plant-derived cannabinoids modulate
the activity of transient receptor potential channels of ankyrin type-1 and melastatin type-8. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 325(3), 1007–1015.
Dyson, A., Peacock, M., Chen, A., et al. (2005). Antihyperalgesic properties of the cannabinoid CT-3 in
chronic neuropathic and inflammatory pain states in the rat. Pain, 116(1–2), 129–137.
El-Alfy, A.T., Ivey, K., Robinson, K., et al. (2010). Antidepressant-like effect of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol
and other cannabinoids isolated from Cannabis sativa L. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 95(4),
434–442.
Finn, D.P., Beckett, S.R., Roe, C.H., et al. (2004). Effects of coadministration of cannabinoids and morphine on nociceptive behaviour, brain monoamines and HPA axis activity in a rat model of persistent
pain. European Journal of Neuroscience, 19(3), 678–686.
Fioravanti, B., De Felice, M., Stucky, C.L., et al. (2008). Constitutive activity at the cannabinoid CB1
receptor is required for behavioral response to noxious chemical stimulation of TRPV1: antinociceptive
actions of CB1 inverse agonists. The Journal of Neuroscience, 28(45), 11593–11602.
Formukong, E.A., Evans, A.T., Evans, F.J. (1988). Analgesic and antiinflammatory activity of constituents
of Cannabis sativa L. Inflammation, 12(4), 361–371.
Fox, A., Kesingland, A., Gentry, C., et al. (2001). The role of central and peripheral cannabinoid 1 receptors in the antihyperalgesic activity of cannabinoids in a model of neuropathic pain. Pain, 92(1–2),
91–100.
Gertsch, J., Leonti, M., Raduner, S., et al. (2008). Beta-caryophyllene is a dietary cannabinoid. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105(26), 9099–9104.
Ibrahim, M.M., Deng, H., Zvonok, A., et al. (2003). Activation of CB2 cannabinoid receptors by AM1241
inhibits experimental neuropathic pain: pain inhibition by receptors not present in the CNS. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 100(18), 10529–10533.
Izzo, A.A., Borrelli, F., Capasso, R., Di Marzo, V., and Mechoulam, R. (2009). Non-psychotropic plant
cannabinoids: new therapeutic opportunities from an ancient herb. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences,
30(10), 515–527.
Kathmann, M., Flau, K., Redmer, A., Trankle, C., and Schlicker, E. (2006). Cannabidiol is an allosteric
modulator at mu- and delta-opioid receptors. Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Archives of Pharmacology, 372(5),
354–361.
Kobayashi, K., Fukuoka, T., Obata, K., et al. (2005). Distinct expression of TRPM8, TRPA1, and TRPV1
mRNAs in rat primary afferent neurons with adelta/c-fibers and colocalization with trk receptors.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 493(4), 596–606.
Ligresti, A., Schiano-Moriello, A., Starowicz, K., et al. (2006). Antitumor activity of plant cannabinoids
with emphasis on the effect of cannabidiol on human breast carcinoma. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 318(3), 1375–1387.
Maione, S., Piscitelli, F., Gatta, L., et al. (2011). Non-psychoactive cannabinoids modulate the descending
pathway of antinociception in anaesthetized rats through several mechanisms of action. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 162(3), 584–596.
Mao, J., Price, D.D., Lu, J., Keniston, L., and Mayer, D.J. (2000). Two distinctive antinociceptive systems
in rats with pathological pain. Neuroscience Letters, 280(1), 13–16.
Murray, R.M., Morrison, P.D., Henquet, C., and Di Forti, M. (2007). Cannabis, the mind and society: the
hash realities. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8(11), 885–895.
Nitanda, A., Yasunami, N., Tokumo, K., Fujii, H., Hirai, T., and Nishio, H. (2005). Contribution of
the peripheral 5-HT 2A receptor to mechanical hyperalgesia in a rat model of neuropathic pain.
Neurochemistry International, 47(6), 394–400.
Pan, H., Mukhopadhyay, P., Rajesh, M., et al. (2009). Cannabidiol attenuates cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity by decreasing oxidative/nitrosative stress, inflammation, and cell death. Journal of Pharmacology
and Experimental Therapeutics, 328(3), 708–714.

Pain

Pertwee, R.G., Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A., et al. (2007). The psychoactive plant cannabinoid, Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol, is antagonized by Delta8- and Delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin in mice in vivo.
British Journal of Pharmacology, 150(5), 586–594.
Pertwee, R.G. (2008). The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology of three plant cannabinoids:
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 153(2), 199–215.
Pertwee, R.G. (2009). Emerging strategies for exploiting cannabinoid receptor agonists as medicines. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 156(3), 397–411.
Qin, N., Neeper, M.P., Liu, Y., Hutchinson, T.L., Lubin, M.L., and Flores, C.M. (2008). TRPV2 is activated by cannabidiol and mediates CGRP release in cultured rat dorsal root ganglion neurons. Journal of
Neuroscience, 28(24), 6231–6238.
Rock, E.M., Bolognini, D., and Limebeer, C.L., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol, a non-psychotropic component
of cannabis, attenuates vomiting and nausea-like behaviour via indirect agonism of 5-HT1A somatodendritic autoreceptors in the dorsal raphe nucleus. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165(8), 2620–2634.
Rog, D.J., Nurmikko, T.J., Friede, T., and Young, C.A. (2005). Randomized, controlled trial of cannabisbased medicine in central pain in multiple sclerosis. Neurology, 65(6), 812–819.
Russo, E.B. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage
effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163(7), 1344–1364.
Russo, E.B., Burnett, A., Hall, B., and Parker, K.K. (2005). Agonistic properties of cannabidiol at 5-HT1a
receptors. Neurochemical Research, 30(8), 1037–1043.
Russo, E.B. and McPartland, J.M. (2003). Cannabis is more than simply delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 165(4), 431–432.
Ryberg, E., Larsson, N., Sjögren, S., et al. (2007). The orphan receptor GPR55 is a novel cannabinoid
receptor. British Journal of Pharmacology, 152(7), 1092–1101.
Sanders, J., Jackson, D.M., and Starmer, G.A. (1979). Interactions among the cannabinoids in the
antagonism of the abdominal constriction response in the mouse. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 61(3),
281–285.
Schuelert, N. and McDougall, J.J. (2011). The abnormal cannabidiol analogue O-1602 reduces nociception in a rat model of acute arthritis via the putative cannabinoid receptor GPR55. Neuroscience Letters,
500(1), 72–76.
Smith, F.L., Cichewicz, D., Martin, Z.L., and Welch, S.P. (1998). The enhancement of morphine antinociception in mice by delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 60(2),
559–566.
Sofia, R.D., Vassar, H.B., and Knobloch, L.C. (1975). Comparative analgesic activity of various naturally
occurring cannabinoids in mice and rats. Psychopharmacologia, 40(4), 285–295.
Staton, P.C., Hatcher, J.P., Walker, D.J., et al. (2008). The putative cannabinoid receptor GPR55 plays
a role in mechanical hyperalgesia associated with inflammatory and neuropathic pain. Pain, 139(1),
225–236.
Tham, S.M., Angus, J.A., Tudor, E.M., and Wright, C.E. (2005). Synergistic and additive interactions of
the cannabinoid agonist CP55,940 with µ opioid receptor and α2-adrenoceptor agonists in acute pain
models in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 144(6), 875–884.
Thomas, A., Baillie, G.L., Phillips, A.M., Razdan, R.K., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2007). Cannabidiol
displays unexpectedly high potency as an antagonist of CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists in vitro. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150(5), 613–623.
Toth, C.C., Jedrzejewski, N.M., Ellis, C.L., and Frey, W.H. 2nd (2010). Cannabinoid-mediated modulation of neuropathic pain and microglial accumulation in a model of murine type I diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain. Molecular Pain, 6, 16.
Varvel, S.A., Wiley, J.L., Yang, R., et al. (2006). Interactions between THC and cannabidiol in mouse models of cannabinoid activity. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 186(2), 226–634.

485

486

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Vay, L., Gu, C., and McNaughton, P.A. (2012) The thermo-TRP ion channel family: properties and therapeutic implications. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165(4), 787–801.
Walter, L., Franklin, A., Witting, A., et al. (2003). Nonpsychotropic cannabinoid receptors regulate microglial cell migration. The Journal of Neuroscience, 23(4), 1398–1405
Ward, S.J., Ramirez, M.D., Neelakantan, H., and Walker, E.A. (2011). Cannabidiol prevents the development of cold and mechanical allodynia in paclitaxel-treated female C57BI6 mice. Anesthesia and
Analgesia, 113(4), 947–950.
Welch, S.P. and Stevens, D.L. (1992). Antinociceptive activity of intrathecally administered cannabinoids alone, and in combination with morphine, in mice. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, 262(1), 10–18.
Welch, S.P., Thomas, C., and Patrick, G.S. (1995). Modulation of cannabinoid-induced antinociception
after intracerebroventricular versus intrathecal administration to mice: possible mechanisms for interaction with morphine. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 272(1), 310–321.
Williams, J., Haller, V.L., Stevens, D.L., and Welch, S.P. (2008) Decreased basal endogenous opioid levels
in diabetic rodents: effects on morphine and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinoid-induced antinociception.
European Journal of Pharmacology, 584(1), 78–86.
Wong, G.Y. and Gavva, N.R. (2009) Therapeutic potential of vanilloid receptor TRPV1 agonists and antagonists as analgesics: Recent advances and setbacks. Brain Research Reviews, 60(1), 267–277.
Xiong, W., Cui, T., Cheng, K., et al. (2012). Cannabinoids suppress inflammatory and neuropathic pain by
targeting α3 glycine receptors. Journal of Experimental Medicine, 209(6), 1121–1134.
Yoon, M.H. and Choi, J. (2003). Pharmacologic interaction between cannabinoid and either clonidine or
neostigmine in the rat formalin test. Anesthesiology, 99(3), 701–707.

Chapter 26

Cannabis and Multiple Sclerosis
Gareth Pryce and David Baker

26.1 Multiple sclerosis
26.1.1 Natural history and pathology

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory, demyelinating disease of the central nervous system
(CNS) and is the most common cause of nontraumatic neurological disability in young adults of
northern European descent (Compston and Coles 2002, 2008). This disease affects about 100,000
people within the UK. The absolute number of cases of MS around the world has steadily increased,
possibly as a result of improved diagnosis amongst other factors and affects 2–3 million people
worldwide (Kurtzke 1993). The incidence of MS is geographically restricted and occurs with high
incidence in Northern Europe and in regions colonized by white Northern Europeans such as
Canada and Northern US, Australia, and New Zealand with a gradient of higher incidence further
from the equator (Compston and Coles 2002). MS is more common in females compared to males
with an increasing ratio of 3:1, with a more pronounced female incidence in younger MS patients
with relapsing-remitting disease (RRMS) (Runmarker and Andersen 1993). The highest incidence
of MS reported is in the Orkney Isles with an incidence of 1 in 170 females (Visser et al. 2012).
Disease is influenced by genetics, as evidenced by an increased concordance of MS in monozygotic twins (~30%) compared to dizygotic twins (~5% concordance rate) and is polygenically
controlled (Compston and Coles 2002, 2008). Disease is associated with the expression of certain
MHC haplotypes such as human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DRB1*1501 and is influenced by over
50 other immune-related, susceptibility genes (Prat et al. 2005; Sawcer et al. 2011). However the
concordance of disease rate in identical twins demonstrates that other, environmental, factors
may influence susceptibility. Migration studies from low- to high-incidence areas suggest that
the environmental trigger is acquired before the age of 15 (Compston and Coles 2002). Some
have suggested that it may relate to age of infection and there are thoughts that this could relate
to Epstein–Barr virus infection (Ascherio and Munger 2010; Sumaya et al. 1980). The vast
majority of people with MS are infected with Epstein–Barr virus compared to 90% of the general
population and there is increased frequency of MS in people who developed glandular fever
(Handel et al. 2010). This is indirectly supported by the geographic distribution of people with
MS (Ebers and Savodnick 1993). Vitamin D levels can influence the immune response and may
even be important in utero (Willer et al. 2005). Importantly a number of genes associated with
MS, such as certain HLA haplotypes, contain vitamin D responsive elements in their promoter
regions that can influence expression and may link environment and genetic susceptibility elements (Ramagopalan et al. 2009, 2010). MS most commonly (about 80%) presents as a series
of relapsing-remitting episodes of loss of neurological function that eventually develops into
a chronic, secondary progressive (SPMS) phase with no remission and increasing disability
over time, which correlates with CNS atrophy and axonal loss, particularly in the spinal cord
(Bjartmar et al. 2000). In about 10–15% of people, particularly in those with an onset later in

488

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

life, the disease becomes progressive (primary progressive MS) from onset (Compston and Coles
2002, 2008). As such about 80% of people with MS will be severely disabled within 25 years from
disease onset.
Disease is associated with blood–brain barrier dysfunction and mononuclear cell infiltration that arises around postcapillary venules, and leukocytes then invade the brain parenchyma
leading to an expanding ring of macrophage-mediated myelin-destruction. This leads to the
pathological hallmark of MS, which is demyelination of the white and gray matter, due to loss
of oligodendrocytes and myelin. Although initially there is remyelination (shadow plaques), the
capacity to repair eventually becomes exhausted and astrogliotic scars are formed within demyelinated plaques. Whilst lesion load is decreased following successful immunosuppressive treatment (Jones and Coles 2010; Polman et al. 2006), suggesting that leukocyte inflammation is the
damaging force in MS, it has also been suggested that damage to the astrocyte or oligodendrocyte
may be the primary event followed by infiltration of mononuclear cells (Barnett and Prineas 2004;
Parratt and Prineas 2010).
As the disease evolves, inflammatory attacks increase the burden of demyelination and a dystrophic environment leads to eventual axonal loss, which impairs normal neurotransmission.
This leads to the development of additional distressing symptoms such as incontinence, limb
tremor, pain, spasms, fatigue, and spasticity, which have a major negative impact on quality of life
indices (Compston and Coles 2002; Confavreux and Vukusic 2006). RRMS is the most common
clinically presenting form of MS, with an incidence of approximately 85%, with the typical age
of onset being the early third decade of life. RRMS is characterized by acute or subacute onset of
neurological dysfunction lasting for more than 24 h, usually resolving within weeks to complete
or partial recovery. The frequency of relapses varies over time but there appears to be a clear trend
for relapses to be more common in the initial years of the disease and recovery from these early
relapses to be more complete (Weinshenker et al. 1989). The time taken to convert to a secondary
progressive neurodegenerative phenotype can vary widely between individuals and may reflect
differences in an individual’s ability to cope with episodes of neuronal insult, perhaps consistent
with genetic control and heterogeneity of disease (Compston and Coles 2002). In approximately
a quarter of cases, neurological disability does not reach a level where it impinges on daily living
but conversely in around 15% of cases the progression to disability is rapid. The prognosis for
patients is better in cases where sensory symptoms dominate the course of disease and there is a
complete recovery from these symptoms at remission whereas the prognosis is poorer when there
is motor involvement such as deficits of pyramidal, visual, sphincteric and cerebellar systems
(Amato and Ponziani 2000). Frequent relapses and incomplete recovery plus a short time period
between the initial neurological event and the subsequent relapse also have a poorer prognosis.
There is also a poorer prognosis for the disease in older men who develop MS (Compston and
Coles 2002; Weinshenker et al. 1989). However, once a threshold of disability has been reached,
disability progression is remarkably uniform (Confavreux et al. 2000), and approximately 90% of
RRMS patients will develop progressive disease after 25 years of clinical follow-up (Weinshenker
et al. 1989). It may be that given enough time, all RRMS patients will eventually convert to the
progressive phase of the disease. A recent study demonstrated that disability progression seems
to follow a two-stage course. The first stage, corresponding to clinical disease onset to irreversible
Kurztke expanded disability status scale (EDSS) 3 (moderate disability in one of eight functional
systems, or mild disability in three or four functional systems), is dependent on ongoing focal
neuroinflammation. There is a second stage, from irreversible disability scale 3 to irreversible disability scale 6 (intermittent or unilateral constant assistance (cane, crutch, brace) required to walk
about 100 m with or without resting), which is independent of ongoing focal neuroinflammation

Cannabis and Multiple Sclerosis

and where neuroprotective strategies are indicated, rather than immunomodulatory therapies
which are indicated for the phase one stage of MS (Leray et al. 2010).
Whilst immune-mediated conduction block and destruction of CNS myelin, followed by lesion
resolution and limited myelin repair, may account for the relapsing-remitting nature of the disease, what is less clear are the mechanisms that account for the conversion to the chronic neurodegenerative secondary phase, which appears to be independent of, though worsened by, the
accumulated neuronal dysfunction accompanying relapses (Bjartmar et al. 2003). A gradual
degeneration of predominantly the pyramidal and cerebellar systems evolves which is often
accompanied by sphincter and sexual dysfunction (Amato and Ponziani 2000). In addition, a
subtype of MS, primary progressive MS (PPMS) presents as a progressive degenerative phenotype
in 10–15% of patients after an initial bout of CNS inflammation, which along with secondary progressive MS is largely refractory to currently available MS therapies such as immunomodulation
(Miller and Leary 2007), and where neuroprotective strategies are urgently indicated. Clinically,
PPMS develops at a later age than RRMS, with onset in the fourth decade rather than the third
decade as seen in RRMS (Andersson et al. 1999), and with a lower female preponderance.
26.1.2 Symptoms and disability

Over recent years, axonal pathology during MS has been re-examined and it has been established
that CNS atrophy and axonal loss occurs, coincident with inflammatory lesion formation, early
in the relapsing-remitting phase. This may be accommodated initially by remodeling of neuronal
circuits (neural plasticity) or an increase in the number of neural precursors in some lesional areas
contiguous with subventricular zones (Chang et al. 2008). However, as the disease continues, a
threshold is reached, beyond which permanent impairment and increasing disability is established (Bjartmar et al. 2000, 2003; Confavreux and Vukusic 2006; Confavreux et al. 2000). This
suggests that axonal loss rather than myelin damage is the key determinant of progressive disability in MS. In addition, a doubling in the levels of glutamate, an excitatory amino acid that has been
shown to be neurotoxic in excess is seen in the CSF of MS patients undergoing an inflammatory
episode (Stover et al. 1997).
In experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of MS induced by the
development of autoimmunity against myelin antigens, 15–30% of spinal cord axons can be lost
before permanent locomotor impairment is noted (Bjartmar et al. 2000; Wujek et al. 2002). After
a number of relapse events, permanent disability develops with significant axonal loss (40–80%,
as also occurs in MS), in the spinal cord (Wujek et al. 2002) and the development of hind limb
spasticity and tremor (Baker et al. 2000), which may reflect as the preferential loss of inhibitory
circuits in certain locations of the spinal cord and their influence on signaling to skeletal muscles.
Whilst inflammatory events are associated with axonal transections, chronic demyelination may
contribute to a slow degenerative process.
As increasing numbers of axons are lost, this creates an extra burden on the remaining neurons and potential excitotoxicity due to increased activity on these neurons within the neural
circuitry. Thus, a slow amplifying cascade of neuronal death may be triggered, which could occur
independently of significant inflammation. This would be compatible with the slow progression
in secondary progressive MS and the inability of potent immunosuppressive agents to inhibit
this aspect of disease despite their efficacy in reducing blood–brain barrier dysfunction and the
reduction of relapse rate (Coles et al. 1999; Confavreux and Vukusic 2006). During all neurodegenerative diseases, symptoms occur because homeostatic control of neurotransmission is lost,
and may result from increased neurotransmission by excessive signaling of excitatory circuits or

489

490

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

loss of inhibitory circuits or vice versa. As it appears that an important function of the cannabinoid system is the modulation of neurotransmitter release via cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1)
expression at presynaptic nerve terminals (Wilson and Nicoll 2002), this raises the possibility of
therapeutic intervention in CNS events for symptom control by the manipulation of this system.

26.2 Cannabinoids and symptom management in MS
26.2.1 Historical studies

The primary area of investigation of the cannabinoids in MS so far has been that of symptom
relief, in particular: bladder incontinence, tremor, and particularly limb spasticity, as patients
claim that these particular symptoms are alleviated by cannabis (Consroe et al. 1997). Spasticity is
one of the most common reported symptoms of MS and can affect approximately 50% of patients
to some degree which has significant deleterious effects of quality of life and the ability to function
in daily life (Barnes et al. 2003). A recent web-based survey of MS patients in Spain reported the
presence of spasticity in 65% of patients with 40% rating this as moderate or severe with the severity increasing with the degree of disability (Oreja-Guevara et al. 2013). Current therapies for spasticity include the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor agonist baclofen, tinazidine, and
benzodiazepines (Paisley et al. 2002). Intrathecal baclofen is commonly used for the treatment of
severe refractory spasticity (Kita and Goodkin 2000). The anticonvulsant gabapentin and local
administration of botulinum toxin have also shown efficacy in clinical trials (Kita and Goodkin
2000; Paisley et al. 2002). A recent German study has reported that 55% of physicians were dissatisfied with current treatment options for spasticity and the chief patient-reported negative effects
were adverse side effects (92.5%) and poor efficacy (88%) with one-third of patients seeking relief
by self-medication (Henze et al. 2013).
The pathophysiology of spasticity remains poorly understood but it may reflect a preferential
loss of inhibitory circuitry in the spinal cord resulting in excessive levels of stimulatory signals.
Under normal circumstances, inhibitory signals are sent via the corticospinal tract to the spinal
cord, but following injury, damage to the corticospinal tract, a hallmark of MS, causes disinhibition of the stretch reflex leading to a reduction in the triggering threshold. This can result in
excessive contraction of the muscles, sometimes even at rest (Adams and Hicks 2005; Brown 1994;
Nielsen et al. 2007). The hypertonic mouse mutant hyrt (Gilbert et al. 2006), shows spastic signs
in the hind limbs associated with a reduction in the level of inhibitory GABAA receptors in lower
motor neurons. Loss of GABAergic inputs or GABA receptor-expressing neurons may produce
the spasticity seen in MS as neurodegeneration progresses and explains the efficacy of GABA
agonists such as baclofen. Improved treatment regimens for spasticity are required as agents that
directly interfere with neurotransmitter activity are often associated with undesirable side effects
such as cognitive impairment (Paisley et al. 2002).
26.2.2 Experimental evidence

Experimental data in MS models in mice have proved the antispastic and antitremor effects
of cannabinoids and cannabinoid CB1 receptor agonists (Baker et al. 2000, 2001; Pryce and
Baker 2007) and any CB1 agonist that reaches the CNS has the potential to inhibit spasticity.
Furthermore and importantly, antagonism of the cannabinoid system by CB1 receptor antagonists
produces a worsening of these signs, indicating the presence of an endogenous cannabinoid tone,
which is modulating these signs to some degree via the release of endocannabinoids in response to
elevated neuronal excitation (Baker et al. 2000, 2001). The cannabis-derived medication Sativex®

Cannabis and Multiple Sclerosis

consisting of an approximate 1:1 mixture of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol
has also demonstrated efficacy in the reduction of hind limb spasticity in an experimental model
of MS (Hilliard et al. 2012). In addition, endocannabinoid (particularly anandamide) levels are
raised in the spinal cords and brains of mice, which show hind limb spasticity, but not in animals,
which have equivalent levels of neurodegeneration but without associated limb spasticity (Baker
et al. 2001). This further indicates the presence of an endocannabinoid tone, which is elevated as
a result of spasticity and tremor in these animals. Furthermore, administration of compounds
which elevate endogenous anandamide levels, via inhibition either of re-uptake, or of enzymatic
degradation by fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), also reduces the level of spasticity in mice
(Baker et al. 2001; Pryce et al. 2013). These observations provide objective evidence, to underpin
patient perceptions of the efficacy of cannabis on MS symptoms.
26.2.3 Clinical evidence

In MS patients, it has been reported that a cannabis extract administered as a sublingual spray,
showed efficacy in the treatment of bladder incontinence, showing both a decrease in emptying
episodes and an increase in bladder retention volume (Brady et al. 2004). A second study as part
of the Cannabis in Multiple Sclerosis (CAMS) study of patients, treated with a cannabis extract
or THC, reported a significant reduction in episodes of urge incontinence compared to placebo
(Freeman et al. 2006). This suggests that cannabinoids can compensate for the dysregulation of
bladder neural circuitry that frequently accompanies disease progression in multiple sclerosis.
The first reports of the efficacy of cannabinoids for the alleviation of spasticity in MS were
described in four small-scale studies (Brenneisen et al. 1996; Meinck et al. 1989; Petro and
Ellenburger 1981; Ungerleider et al. 1987) all showing positive improvements. A number of larger
controlled and blinded trials have since been undertaken on spasticity in MS (Collin et al. 2007;
Killestein et al. 2002; Vaney et al. 2004; Wade et al. 2004, 2006; Zajicek et al. 2003, 2005). Although
oral cannabis at doses that lack overt psychoactivity, showed no or marginal effects in treating
spasticity as assessed by the Ashworth Scale (Killestein et al. 2002), there was an improvement in
the time taken to complete a 10 m walk (Zajicek et al. 2003). Oral administration of cannabinoids
is hampered compared to other routes due to variable absorption and metabolism including a
significant first-pass effect through the liver which complicates dose-titration (Grotenhermen
2003). However, similar studies with a sublingual cannabis extract spray (Sativex®), has likewise
had a minimal impact on objective outcomes such as the Ashworth Scale (Collin et al. 2007; Wade
et al. 2003, 2004), but have had consistent, subjective patient-assessed, perceived improvements
in spasms and spasticity. These apparently negative results may be largely due to the insensitivity
of the Ashworth Scale in detecting positive effects of antispastic therapies where many of the currently prescribed drugs fail to show efficacy using this measure (Shakespeare et al. 2003).
As cannabis can affect cognitive processes (Curran et al. 2002), it can be argued that whilst
patients feel subjectively improved due to mood modulation, these may not be objectively
demonstrable at cannabinoid doses that do not induce significant cannabimimetic psychoactive
effects (Killestein et al. 2002; Pertwee 2007; Wade et al. 2004, 2006; Zajicek et al. 2003, 2005).
However, positive effects, with few exceptions (Killestein et al. 2002), have been reported following treatment with THC or medical cannabis extracts (Collin et al. 2007; Vaney et al. 2004;
Wade et al. 2004, 2006; Zajicek et al. 2003). Importantly, patients on clinical trials suggest that
only certain signs such as spasticity, pain, and sleep disturbances are improved, suggesting that
these positive effects are unlikely to be simply due to a generalized perception of improvement
following drug administration (Collin et al. 2007; Vaney et al. 2004; Wade et al. 2004, 2006;

491

492

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Zajicek et al. 2003). This suggested some positive benefit of cannabinoids, and further evidence
of the efficacy on MS-related spasticity following long-term administration of THC was reported
showing a positive improvement on the Ashworth Scale in patients treated with THC for 1 year
(Zajicek et al. 2005).
The apparently equivocal evidence in these studies of the efficacy of cannabis on spasticity in
MS may reflect the poorly designed nature of many of the early trials, with subjective rather than
quantitative outcome measures and insufficient appreciation of the pharmacokinetic problems
such as first-pass effects via the liver with the oral route of administration (a clinically preferred
route compared to smoking) (Agurell et al. 1986; Pertwee 2002). It would appear that routes of
delivery, which facilitate rapid entry to the bloodstream and then to the CNS, are preferable to the
orally administered route. Such routes are; aerosol inhalation, rectal suppository, or sublingual
spray (Grotenhermen 2003). This may account for the claims that smoked cannabis, which is
rapidly absorbed and has no first-pass effects, allowing the self-titration of the therapeutic effect,
is preferable to orally administered THC, which is slowly absorbed and subjected to first-pass
metabolism in the liver plus there is little chance of self-titration (Agurell et al. 1986; Consroe
et al. 1997; Pertwee 2002). The biology of the cannabinoid system indicates that CB1 mediates
both the psychoactive and the majority of the potentially therapeutic effects of cannabis, and
therefore its use will invariably be associated with side effects, which some people may find
intolerable (Baker et al. 2003; Killestein et al. 2002; Pryce and Baker 2007). However, through
individual dose-titration, these may be limited to achieve a therapeutic window where a benefit
is achieved whilst unwanted side effects are limited. A study on cannabinoid-mediated control of
tics associated with Tourette’s syndrome suggests it is indeed possible to have a positive therapeutic outcome without significant cognitive impairment (Müller-Vahl et al. 2003).
Therefore, usage in any clinical indication will be a balance between treatment of a particular
condition and the acceptability of side effects. In a recent small-scale study, the use of smoked or
ingested street cannabis by MS patients was associated with a negative effect on cognitive function
compared to a noncannabis using MS cohort, indicating the importance of defined doses of THC
and dose titration (Honarmand et al. 2011). In contrast, in cannabis naïve MS patients treated
with Sativex® (a 50:50 mixture of THC and CBD), there was no induction of psychopathology or
cognitive impairment observed in the treatment group, further indicating the potential benefits of
defined cannabis therapeutics versus street cannabis (Aragona et al. 2009).
26.2.4 Recent studies

More recent clinical trials with improved outcome measurements have reported positive effects
of cannabinoid therapeutics in the treatment of spasticity which seem to have finally overcome
the dubiety arising from previous studies. More weight has been given to a patient rated Numeric
Rating Scale of improvements in spasticity as a result of treatment rather than relying on the unreliable Ashworth Scale as the primary outcome measure.
As previously mentioned, in the CAMS study (Zajicek et al. 2003), despite there being no
significant improvement in spasticity as assessed by the Ashworth Scale, there was a significant
improvement in a 10 m walking time test in Marinol® (synthetic THC)-treated patients. Patientrated evaluations also reported significant improvements in spasticity and also quality of sleep
and pain. In the extension study over a period of 12 months, a modest but significant improvement in spasticity assessed by observer-assessed Ashworth Scale was reported as well as patientrated improvements in cannabinoid treated groups (Zajicek et al. 2005).
In light of the poor experience with the Ashworth Scale due to its limited ability to detect positive improvements in spasticity, a study investigating the effects of Sativex® on spasticity used a

Cannabis and Multiple Sclerosis

patient-assessed numerical rating scale (NRS) with a range of 1–10 as the primary endpoint
(Collin et al. 2007). Sativex®-treated MS patients reported a significant decrease in their spasticity
score of 1.18 compared to placebo. In comparison, the decrease assessed by the Ashworth Scale
was not significant. Of the 40% of patients who responded to Sativex® a reduction of at least 30%
in the NRS score was reported.
In a study which was enriched by the inclusion of early responding patients to treatment who
were refractory to available antispastic medication (at least 20% reduction in NRS score compared
to baseline after 4 weeks of treatment), in the second phase of the study (12 weeks) a significant
reduction in NRS score was maintained compared to placebo over this period (Novotna et al.
2011).
The MUSEC (Multiple Sclerosis and Extract of Cannabis) trial recently reported the superiority
of a standardized oral cannabis extract in the treatment of muscle stiffness also using a category
rating scale (CRS) measuring patient-reported muscle stiffness from baseline. Cannabis extract to
a maximum of 25 mg THC daily over 10 weeks demonstrated twice the amount of relief compared
to placebo (Zajicek et al. 2012). Effective pain relief was also achieved by the cannabis extract
particularly in those patients with high baseline scores.
This less equivocal and positive recent clinical evidence for the potential benefit of cannabis on
MS-associated spasticity has led (June, 2010) to the approval for prescription in the UK and elsewhere of the cannabis extract Sativex® for the treatment of spasticity in MS. In addition, a smallscale Canadian study investigating the use of smoked cannabis for the treatment of spasticity in
MS patients refractory to current medications reported highly significant reductions in spasticity
as assessed by the modified Ashworth Scale (reduction of 2.74 points compared to placebo) and
also significant reductions in pain scores (Corey-Bloom et al. 2012). The proviso here is that the
patients smoking cannabis were significantly cognitively affected which will be a negative indication for many patients. Indeed it is likely that all patients reporting improvements in spasticity
with cannabinoid therapeutics will have cognitive side effects to a greater or lesser degree due to
the ubiquitous expression of the CB1 receptor in the brain. That these patients showed a positive
response on the Ashworth Scale in addition to side effects, would be consistent with the idea that
CB1 receptors mediate both the positive and negative aspects of cannabis, as shown in animals
(Pryce and Baker 2007; Wilkinson et al. 2003). Furthermore, in cases where psychoactive side
effects were not induced, as was the aim in most trials with oral and sublingual cannabis that
failed to show influences on the Ashworth Scale, it is likely that treatment was suboptimal. This
is because the biology dictates that cannabis has only a limited mechanism to target CNS centers
controlling movement, whilst avoiding centers controlling cognitive functions. Thus cannabis has
a narrow therapeutic window.
Thus whilst the data suggest that medicinal cannabis has benefit, a recent publication raises the
concern that this medication will not be available to a large percentage of MS patients that could
benefit from cannabinoid treatment of their spasticity (Lu et al. 2012). The study highlights that
due to issues of pricing versus quality of life measurements, the authors state “Sativex® appears
unlikely to be considered cost effective by UK funders of healthcare for spasticity in MS. This is
unfortunate, since it appears that Sativex® use is likely to benefit some patients in the management
of this common consequence of MS.”
This is a concern for all those who have contributed greatly, over many years to the acceptance
of the medicinal properties of cannabinoid-based medicine in MS in the face of great skepticism
by some members of the medical/scientific profession and would seem to have the potential of
driving MS patients back into the arms of their local illegal cannabis supplier to alleviate their
symptoms, rather than being prescribed legal medication from their general practitioner.

493

494

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

26.3 Cannabinoids as a neuroprotective therapy in MS
26.3.1 Experimental evidence

The neurotoxic mechanisms during MS and experimental models are varied, with the potential agents of neuronal/axonal damage including; oxidative damage to mitochondria, release of
inflammatory cytokines, nitric oxide release from activated macrophages/microglia and excitotoxicity due to excessive glutamate signaling leading to toxic levels of calcium ion influx. There
is increasing evidence that elevated levels of glutamate are seen in both MS and EAE particularly
during the active stages of disease (Marte et al. 2010; Stover et al. 1997; Sulkowski et al. 2009),
accompanied by an increase in the level of expression of Group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptors and excitatory amino acid transporters (Sulkowski et al. 2009). Elevation of glutamate was
also observed in the progressive phase of EAE concomitant with increased levels of neurodegeneration, further implicating glutamate excitotoxicity as a mechanism for neuronal degeneration in
experimental MS (Marte et al. 2010). Modulation of the effects of elevated CNS glutamate levels
has been reported to show disease amelioration in experimental and clinical studies (Bolton and
Paul 2006; Pitt et al. 2000; Smith et al. 2000; Srinivasan et al. 2005). Elevated levels of glutamate
may result from: the downregulation of enzymes responsible for the catabolism of glutamate
(Hardin-Pouzet et al. 1997), the downregulation or reversal of the actions of neuronal and astrocytic glutamate transporters (Loría et al. 2010; Ohgoh et al. 2002) or the direct release of glutamate
from activated Th17 cells forming direct synapse-like contact with neurons (Siffrin et al. 2010).
The ability of cannabinoids to downregulate the release of neurotransmitters such as glutamate
is long established (Shen and Thayer 1999) leading to the hypothesis that they may have neuroprotective properties in neuroinflammatory disease.
The important role of the cannabinoid system in the protection against neurodegeneration was
revealed in a mouse model of MS in mice where the CB1 receptor had been genetically deleted. In
these mice, neuroinflammation resulted in an accelerated accumulation of neurological deficits
compared to wild-type animals (Jackson et al. 2005; Pryce et al. 2003). In addition, administration
of exogenous cannabinoid agonists can significantly inhibit neurodegeneration due to neuroinflammation in acute and chronic disease models in the absence of any overt immunosuppression
which would modify the level of neuronal insult (Croxford et al. 2008; Pryce et al. 2003). These
observations would suggest that cannabinoid therapy may have a potential role in the slowing of
neurodegeneration as a result of MS and may be considered as an adjunctive therapy to current
disease-modifying therapies.
26.3.2 Clinical evidence

One clinical study to investigate the potential of cannabinoid therapy (THC) to slow the neurodegeneration that causes disease progression in MS has been undertaken. The Cannabinoid Use in
Progressive Inflammatory brain Disease (CUPID) study was a multicenter based trial performed
in the UK, coordinated by John Zajicek at Derriford Hospital, Plymouth (Zajicek et al. 2013). Four
hundred and ninety-three MS patients with primary or secondary progressive MS were recruited
to the study from 27 centers across UK between May 2006 and July 2008. It was a requirement
for participants entering the trial that their walking was affected by their MS but that they could
still walk, with aids if necessary. Participants were randomly assigned to receive THC capsules or
placebo capsules, to be taken by mouth over a period of 3 years. Three hundred and twenty-nine
people were allocated to receive the THC capsules and 164 were allocated to the placebo group.
For each participant, the first 4 weeks of the trial were devoted to establishing the best tolerated

Cannabis and Multiple Sclerosis

dose of study treatment. For the remainder of the study period, participants remained on a stable
dose of trial treatment, as far as possible, before the dose was gradually reduced to zero at the
end of the treatment period. The study was “double-blind,” meaning that neither the participants
nor the doctors and nurses involved at the study sites knew which treatment group they were
in. Despite the abundant experimental evidence that cannabinoid therapy has a neuroprotective
role in a spectrum of neurological diseases, overall the study found no evidence that THC had
an effect on MS progression in either of the main outcomes (the EDSS neurological assessments
conducted by doctors at the study clinics or the Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale (MSIS-29) questionnaire responses provided by the participants). The MSIS-29 is a new measure of the physical
and psychological impact of MS from the patient’s perspective (Hobart et al. 2001). The EDSS and
MSIS-29 scores showed little change over the course of the study and no difference was found
between the active and placebo groups. However, it was evident that the placebo group had not
progressed as expected, which complicates assessing the value of the trial. However, and potentially importantly, there was some evidence that THC might have a significant (P <0.01) beneficial
effect in participants at the lower end of the EDSS disability scale (<5.5 EDSS). As this benefit was
only found in a small group of people rather than the whole study population, further studies will
be needed to assess the robustness of this finding.
The interpretation of this study is that although the study found no evidence that THC has an
effect on MS progression, most study participants were at the high end of the disability scale at
the start of the study and as a whole did not exhibit much change in their MS. There was some
evidence from the two main study assessments (EDSS and MSIS-29) that participants with less
disability had some slowing of MS progression but the number of people in this category was
too small (in statistical terms) to conclude with certainty that THC is effective in slowing MS
progression. More research will be needed to investigate these findings and patients will need to
be selected at the lower end of the disability spectrum before meaningful conclusions on the neuroprotective ability of cannabinoids to slow the rate of disease progression in MS can be drawn.
As was the case in clinical trials of cannabinoids for the treatment of spasticity in MS, early
unsuccessful trials can point to the correct protocol being selected for later trials to provide a
definitive conclusion (Zajicek et al. 2003, 2012) and the CUPID trial will be valuable in terms of
what MS researchers across the world will learn about conducting trials in progressive disease,
so that we can continue to improve study design and the accuracy with which outcomes can be
measured in both clinical practice and research. However, because of the perceived failure of the
study it is not yet clear whether subsequent studies will be performed with cannabinoids and it is
possible that a useful therapeutic agent will be lost.
In summary, great strides have been made in recent years in the acceptance of cannabis as a
medication for MS patients. Cannabis has proved its efficacy in spasticity and is now an approved
medication for this in many countries. The jury is still out on the utility of cannabis as a neuroprotective therapy in MS but the overwhelming amount of experimental data suggests that with the
correct clinical trial design, establishment of the case for its use in the slowing of neurodegeneration is only a matter of time with the proviso that funding can be found to conduct another study.

26.4 Cannabis for chronic neuropathic pain in MS
There is abundant evidence for the efficacy of cannabinoids in the reduction of pain in a number
of experimental models (Lever and Rice 2007), and chronic pain is a frequent symptom in MS
patients (Ehde et al., 2003, 2006). A recent Phase 3 clinical trial has investigated the ability of
cannabis (Sativex®) to treat chronic neuropathic pain in MS patients (Langford et al. 2013). MS

495

496

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

patients who had failed to gain adequate analgesia from existing medication were treated with
THC/CBD spray or placebo as an add-on treatment, in a double-blind manner, for 14 weeks to
investigate the efficacy of the medication in MS-induced neuropathic pain. This parallel-group
phase of the study was then followed by an 18-week randomized-withdrawal study (14-week
open-label treatment period plus a double-blind 4-week randomized-withdrawal phase) to investigate time to treatment failure and show maintenance of efficacy. The results of this investigation
were equivocal, with conflicting findings in the two phases of the study. While there were a large
proportion of responders to THC/CBD spray treatment during the phase A double-blind period,
the primary endpoint was not met due to a similarly large number of placebo responders. In contrast, there was a marked effect in phase B of the study, with an increased time to treatment failure
in the THC/CBD spray group compared to placebo. These findings suggest that further studies
are required to explore the full potential of cannabis-based medication in MS patients.

26.5 Summary and future directions
The confirmation of the ability of cannabis and medications derived from cannabis to alleviate
MS-related spasticity in both experimental and clinical settings is now well established, leading
to the long overdue reintroduction of cannabis (Sativex®) into the list of prescribable medications
around the world. This is encouraging but there are concerns that issues around pricing may
mean that it will not be available to as many MS patients that could benefit from a new medication for this most distressing of symptoms. Time will tell whether these concerns have any credence although the decision to refuse to prescribe by many primary care trusts in the UK are not
encouraging as a result of the absence of a recommendation so far by the UK National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). It is to be hoped that this situation may change in the
foreseeable future.
With current cannabis medications, efficacy will always have to be balanced with the wellknown side effects of cannabis that many patients find undesirable due to the global stimulation
of cannabinoid receptors in the brain rather than just where stimulation is required and a degree
of psychoactive effect will always be seen though this may be limited by dose titration. This has
led to the hypothesis that spasticity in MS patients may be controlled by boosting the levels of
endocannabinoids in the CNS by uptake inhibition or inactivation of enzymatic degradation
of anandamide or 2-arachidonoyl glycerol by inhibitors of FAAH or monoacyl glycerol lipase,
respectively. In the experimental setting, both these approaches have shown efficacy in the treatment of spasticity (Baker et al. 2001, 2012), indicating that they may be useful in the clinical
setting with the added benefit that boosting of endocannabinoid levels does not have the same
psychoactive side effects as conventional cannabinoid receptor agonists (Ligresti et al. 2006).
Another strategy may be to develop cannabinoid receptor agonists that are excluded from the
brain and so unable to stimulate brain cannabinoid receptors yet may also have the ability to
stimulate peripheral cannabinoid receptors, such as those at the neuromuscular junction to alleviate spasticity (Baker et al. 2012). These new experimental approaches may lead to the next generation of cannabinoid therapeutics for MS. The situation concerning the potential of cannabinoids
as potential neuroprotective agents in MS is, despite abundant experimental evidence, currently
lacking firm clinical evidence due to the paucity of clinical trial data.
It is to be hoped that rigorous clinical trials with better design capable of determining the
neuroprotective benefits of cannabinoids in slowing disease progression in MS will be performed
so that the potentially exciting potential of the cannabinoids in this situation are not lost to the
medical community and MS patients.

Cannabis and Multiple Sclerosis

References
Adams, M.M. and Hicks, A.L. (2005). Spasticity after spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord, 43, 577–586.
Agurell, S., Halldin, M., Lindgren, J.E. (1986). Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of delta
1-­tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids with emphasis on man. Pharmacological Reviews, 38, 21–43.
Amato, M.P. and Ponziani, G. (2000). A prospective study on the prognosis of multiple sclerosis.
Neurological Sciences, 21, S831–838.
Andersson, P.B., Waubant, E., Gee, L., and Goodkin, D.E. (1999). Multiple sclerosis that is progressive
from the time of onset: clinical characteristics and progression of disability. Archives of Neurology, 56,
1138–1142.
Aragona, M., Onesti, E., Tomassini, V., et al. (2009). Psychopathological and cognitive effects of therapeutic cannabinoids in multiple sclerosis: a double-blind, placebo controlled, crossover study. Clinical
Neuropharmacology, 32, 41–47.
Ascherio, A. and Munger, K.L. (2010). Epstein-Barr virus infection and multiple sclerosis: a review. Journal
of Neuroimmune Pharmacology, 5, 271–277.
Baker, D., Pryce, G., Croxford, J.L., et al. (2000). Cannabinoids control spasticity and tremor in a multiple
sclerosis model. Nature, 404, 84–87.
Baker, D., Pryce, G., Croxford, J.L., et al. (2001). Endocannabinoids control spasticity in a multiple sclerosis model. FASEB Journal, 15, 300–302.
Baker, D., Pryce, G., Giovannoni, G., and Thompson A.J. (2003). The therapeutic potential of cannabis.
Lancet Neurology, 2, 291–298.
Baker, D., Pryce, G., Jackson, S.J., Bolton, C., and Giovannoni, G. (2012). The biology that underpins
the therapeutic potential of cannabis-based medicines for the control of spasticity in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple Sclerosis and Related Disorders, 1, 64–75.
Barnes, M.P., Kent, R.M., Semlyen, J.K., and McMullen, K.M. (2003). Spasticity in multiple sclerosis.
Neurorehabilitation Neural Repair, 17, 66–70.
Barnett, M.H. and Prineas, J.W. (2004). Relapsing and remitting multiple sclerosis: pathology of the newly
forming lesion. Annals of Neurology, 55, 458–468.
Bjartmar, C., Kidd, G., Mork, S., Rudick, R., and Trapp, B.D. (2000). Neurological disability correlates
with spinal cord axonal loss and reduced N-acetyl aspartate in chronic multiple sclerosis patients.
Annals of Neurology, 48, 893–901.
Bjartmar, C., Wujek, J.R., and Trapp, B.D. (2003). Axonal loss in the pathology of MS: consequences for
understanding the progressive phase of the disease. Journal of the Neurological Sciences, 206, 165–171.
Bolton, C. and Paul, C. (2006). Glutamate receptors in neuroinflammatory demyelinating disease.
Mediators of Inflammation, 2006, 93684.
Brady, C.M., DasGupta, R., Dalton, C., Wiseman, O.J., Berkley, K.J., and Fowler, C.J. (2004). An openlabel pilot study of cannabis-based extracts for bladder dysfunction in advanced multiple sclerosis.
Multiple Sclerosis, 10, 425–433.
Brenneisen, R., Egli, A., Elsohly, M.A., Henn, V., and Spiess, Y. (1996). The effect of orally and rectally
administered delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol on spasticity: a pilot study with 2 patients. International
Journal Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 34, 446–452.
Brown, P. (1994). Pathophysiology of spasticity. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 57,
773–777.
Chang, A., Smith, M.C., Yin, X., Fox, R.J., Staugaitis, S.M., and Trapp, B.D. (2008). Neurogenesis in the
chronic lesions of multiple sclerosis. Brain, 131, 2366–2375.
Coles, A.J., Wing, M.G., Molyneux, P., et al. (1999). Monoclonal antibody treatment exposes three mechanisms underlying the clinical course of multiple sclerosis. Annals of Neurology, 46, 296–304.
Collin, C., Davies, P., Mutiboko, I.K., and Ratcliffe, S. (2007). Randomized controlled trial of cannabisbased medicine in spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis. European Journal of Neurology, 14, 290–296.

497

498

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Compston, A. and Coles, A. (2002). Multiple sclerosis. Lancet, 359, 1221–1231.
Compston, A. and Coles, A. (2008). Multiple sclerosis. Lancet, 372, 1502–1517.
Confavreux, C. and Vukusic, S. (2006). Accumulation of irreversible disability in multiple sclerosis: from
epidemiology to treatment. Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery, 108, 327–332.
Confavreux, C., Vukusic, S., Moreau, T., and Adeleine, P. (2000). Relapses and progression of disability in
multiple sclerosis. New England Journal of Medicine, 343, 1430–1438.
Consroe, P., Musty, R., Rein, J., Tillery, W., and Pertwee, R. (1997). The perceived effects of smoked cannabis on patients with multiple sclerosis. European Neurology, 38, 44–48.
Corey-Bloom, J., Wolfson, T. GamstA., et al. (2012). Smoked cannabis for spasticity in multiple sclerosis: a
randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 184, 1143–1150.
Croxford, J.L., Pryce, G., Jackson, S.J., et al. (2008). Cannabinoid-mediated neuroprotection, not
immunosuppression, may be more relevant to multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neuroimmunology, 193,
120–129.
Curran, H.V., Brignell, C., Fletcher, S., Middleton, P., and Henry, J. (2002). Cognitive and subjective
dose-response effects of acute oral delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in infrequent cannabis users.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 164, 61–70.
Ebers, G.C. and Sadovnick, A.D. (1993). The geographic distribution of multiple sclerosis: a review.
Neuroepidemiology, 12, 1–5.
Ehde, D.M., Gibbons, L.E., Chwastiak, L., Bombardier, C.H., Sullivan, M.D., and Kraft, G.H. (2003).
Chronic pain in a large community sample of persons with multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis, 9,
605–611.
Ehde, D.M., Osborne, T.L., Hanley, M.A., Jensen, M.P., and Kraft, G.H. (2006). The scope and nature of
pain in persons with multiple sclerosis. Multiple Sclerosis, 12, 629–638.
Freeman, R.M., Adekanmi, O., Waterfield, M.R., Waterfield, A.E., Wright, D., and Zajicek, J. (2006).
The effect of cannabis on urge incontinence in patients with multiple sclerosis: a multicentre, randomised placebo-controlled trial (CAMS-LUTS). International Urogynecology Journal and Pelvic Floor
Dysfunction, 17, 636–641.
Gilbert, S.L., Zhang, L., Forster, M.L., et al. (2006). Trak1 mutation disrupts GABA(A) receptor homeostasis in hypertonic mice. Nature Genetics, 38, 245–250.
Grotenhermen, F. (2003). Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of cannabinoids. Clinical
Pharmacokinetics, 42, 327–360.
Handel, A.E., Williamson, A.J., Disanto, G., Handunnetthi, L., Giovannoni, G., and Ramagopalan, S.V.
(2010). An updated meta-analysis of risk of multiple sclerosis following infectious mononucleosis. PLoS
One, 2010,5e12496.
Hardin-Pouzet, H., Krakowski, M., Bourbonniere, L., Didier-Bazes, M., Tran, E., and Owens, T. (1997).
Glutamate metabolism is down-regulated in astrocytes during experimental allergic encephalomyelitis.
Glia, 20, 79–85.
Henze, T., Flachenecker, P., and Zettl, U.K. (2013). Importance and treatment of spasticity in multiple
sclerosis: results of the MOVE 1 study. Der Nervenarzt, 84, 214–222.
Hilliard, A., Stott, C., Wright, S., et al. (2012). Evaluation of the effects of Sativex (THC BDS: CBD BDS)
on inhibition of spasticity in a chronic relapsing experimental allergic autoimmune encephalomyelitis: a
model of multiple sclerosis. ISRN Neurology, 2012, 802649.
Hobart, J., Lamping, D., Fitzpatrick, R., Riazi, A., and Thompson, A. (2001). The Multiple Sclerosis
Impact Scale (MSIS-29): a new patient-based outcome measure. Brain, 124, 962–973.
Honarmand, K., Tierney, M.C., O’Connor, P., and Feinstein, A. (2011). Effects of cannabis on cognitive
function in patients with multiple sclerosis. Neurology, 76, 1153–1160.
Jackson, S.L., Pryce, G., Diemel, D.T., and Baker, D. (2005). Cannabinoid receptor null mice are susceptible to neurofilament damage and caspase 3 activation. Neuroscience, 134, 261–268.

Cannabis and Multiple Sclerosis

Jones, J.L. and Coles, A.J. (2010). New treatment strategies in multiple sclerosis. Experimental Neurology,
225, 34–39.
Killestein, J., Hoogervorst, E.L., Reif, M., et al. (2002). Safety, tolerability, and efficacy of orally administered cannabinoids in MS. Neurology, 58, 1404–1407.
Kita, M., and Goodkin, D.E. (2000). Drugs used to treat spasticity. Drugs, 59, 487–495.
Kurtzke, J.F. (1993). Epidemiologic evidence for multiple sclerosis as an infection. Clinical Microbiology
Reviews, 6, 382–427.
Langford, R.M., Mares, J., Novotna, A., et al. (2013). A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled,
parallel-group study of THC/CBD oromucosal spray in combination with the existing treatment regimen, in the relief of central neuropathic pain in patients with multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neurology,
260, 984–987.
Leray, E., Yaouanq, J., Le Page, E., et al. (2010). Evidence for a two-stage disability progression in multiple
sclerosis. Brain, 133, 1900–1913.
Lever, I.J. and Rice, A.S. (2007). Cannabinoids and pain. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, 177,
265–306.
Ligresti, A., Cascio, M.G., Pryce, G., et al. (2006). New potent and selective inhibitors of anandamide reuptake with antispastic activity in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis. British Journal of Pharmacology,
147, 83–91.
Loría, F., Petrosino, S., Hernangómez, M., et al. (2010). An endocannabinoid tone limits excitotoxicity in
vitro and in a model of multiple sclerosis. Neurobiology of Disease, 37, 166–176.
Lu, L., Pearce, H., Roome, C., Shearer, J., Lang, I.A., and Stein, K. (2012). Cost effectiveness of oromucosal cannabis-based medicine (Sativex ) for spasticity in multiple sclerosis. Pharmacoeconomics, 30,
1157–1171.
Marte, A., Cavallero, A., Morando, S., Uccelli, A., Raiteri, M., and Fedele, E. (2010). Alterations of glutamate release in the spinal cord of mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Journal of
Neurochemistry, 115, 343–352.
Meinck, H.M., Schönle, P.W., and Conrad, B. (1989). Effect of cannabinoids on spasticity and ataxia in
multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neurology, 236, 120–122.
Miller, D.H. and Leary, S.M. (2007). Primary-progressive multiple sclerosis. Lancet Neurology, 6, 903–912.
Müller-Vahl, K.R., Prevedel, H., Theloe, K., Kolbe, H., Emrich, H.M., and Schneider, U. (2003).
Treatment of Tourette syndrome with delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta 9-THC): no influence on
neuropsychological performance. Neuropsychopharmacology, 28, 384–388.
Nielsen, J.B., Crone, C. and Hultborn, H. (2007). The spinal pathophysiology of spasticity – from a basic
science point of view. Acta Physiologica (Oxford), 189, 171–180.
Notcutt, W., Langford, R., Davies, P., Ratcliffe, S. and Potts, R. (2012). A placebo-controlled, parallel-­
group, randomized withdrawal study of subjects with symptoms of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis
who are receiving long-term Sativex (nabiximols). Multiple Sclerosis Journal, 18, 219–228.
Novotna, A., Mares, J., Ratcliffe, S., et al. (2011). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
parallel-­group, enriched-design study of nabiximols* (Sativex ), as add-on therapy, in subjects with
refractory spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis. European Journal Neurology, 18, 1122–1131.
Ohgoh, M., Hanada, T., Smith, T., et al. (2002). Altered expression of glutamate transporters in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Journal of Neuroimmunology, 125, 170–178.
Oreja-Guevara, C., González-Segura, D., and Vila, C. (2013). Spasticity in multiple sclerosis: results of a
Spanish patient survey. International Journal of Neuroscience, 123, 400–408.
Paisley, S., Beard, S., Hunn, A., and Wight, J. (2002). Clinical effectiveness of oral treatments for spasticity
in multiple sclerosis: a systematic review. Multiple Sclerosis, 8, 319–329.
Parratt, J.D. and Prineas, J.W. (2010). Neuromyelitis optica: a demyelinating disease characterized by acute
destruction and regeneration of perivascular astrocytes. Multiple Sclerosis, 16, 1156–1172.

®

®

®

499

500

APPROVED THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS: PRECLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

Pertwee, R.G. (2002). Cannabinoids and multiple sclerosis. Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 95, 165–174.
Pertwee, R.G. (2007). Cannabinoids and multiple sclerosis. Molecular Neurobiology, 36, 45–59.
Petro, D.J. and Ellenberger, C. Jr. (1981). Treatment of human spasticity with delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol.
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, (8–9 Suppl.), 413S–416S.
Pitt, D., Werner, P., and Raine, C.S. (2000). Glutamate excitotoxicity in a model of multiple sclerosis.
Nature Medicine, 6, 67–70.
Polman, C.H., O’Connor, P.W., Havrdova, E., et al. (2006). A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of
natalizumab for relapsing multiple sclerosis. New England Journal of Medicine, 354, 899–910.
Prat, E., Tomaru, U., Sabater, L., et al. (2005). HLA-DRB5*0101 and -DRB1*1501 expression in the multiple sclerosis-associated HLA-DR15 haplotype. Journal of Neuroimmunoogy, 167, 108–119.
Pryce, G., Ahmed, Z., Hankey, D.J., et al. (2003). Cannabinoids inhibit neurodegeneration in models of
multiple sclerosis. Brain, 126, 2191–2202.
Pryce, G. and Baker, D. (2007). Control of spasticity in a multiple sclerosis model is mediated by CB1, not
CB2, cannabinoid receptors. British Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 519–525.
Pryce G., Cabranes A., Fernández-Ruiz J., et al. (2013). Control of experimental spasticity by targeting the
degradation of endocannabinoids using selective fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibitors. Multiple Sclerosis
Journal, 19, 1896–1904.
Ramagopalan, S.V., Heger, A., Berlanga, A.J., et al. (2010). A ChIP-seq defined genome-wide map of vitamin D receptor binding: Associations with disease and evolution. Genome Research, 2, 1352–1360.
Ramagopalan, S.V., Maugeri, N.J., Handunnetthi, L., et al. (2009). Expression of the multiple sclerosisassociated MHC class II Allele HLA-DRB1*1501 is regulated by vitamin D. PLoS Genetics, 5, e1000369.
Runmarker, B. and Andersen, O. (1993). Prognostic factors in a multiple sclerosis incidence cohort with
twenty-five years of follow-up. Brain, 116, 117–134.
Sawcer, S., Hellenthal, G., Pirinen, M. et al., et al. (2011). Genetic risk and a primary role for cell-mediated
immune mechanisms in multiple sclerosis. Nature, 476, 214–219.
Shakespeare, D.T., Boggild, M., and Young, C. (2003). Anti-spasticity agents for multiple sclerosis.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 4, CD001332.
Shen, M. and Thayer, S.A. (1999). Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol acts as a partial agonist to modulate glutamatergic synaptic transmission between rat hippocampal neurons in culture. Molecular Pharmacology,
55, 8–13.
Siffrin, V., Radbruch, H., Glumm, R., et al. (2010). In vivo imaging of partially reversible th17 cell-induced
neuronal dysfunction in the course of encephalomyelitis. Immunity, 33, 424–436.
Smith, T., Groom, A., Zhu, B., and Turski, L. (2000). Autoimmune encephalomyelitis ameliorated by
AMPA antagonists. Nature Medicine, 6, 62–66.
Srinivasan, R., Sailasuta, N., Hurd, R., Nelson, S., and Pelletier, D. (2005). Evidence of elevated glutamate
in multiple sclerosis using magnetic resonance spectroscopy at 3 T. Brain, 128, 1016–1025.
Stover, J.F, Pleines, U.E, Morganti-Kossmann, M.C., Kossmann, T., Lowitzsch, K., and Kempski, O.S.
(1997). Neurotransmitters in cerebrospinal fluid reflect pathological activity. European Journal of
Clinical Investigation, 27, 1038–1043.
Sulkowski, G., Dabrowska-Bouta, B., Kwiatkowska-Patzer, B., and Struzyńska, L. (2009). Alterations in
glutamate transport and group I metabotropic glutamate receptors in the rat brain during acute phase of
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Folia Neuropathologica, 47, 329–337.
Sumaya, C.V., Myers, L.W., and Ellison, G.W. (1980). Epstein-Barr virus antibodies in multiple sclerosis.
Archives of Neurology, 37, 94–96.
Ungerleider, J.T., Andyrsiak, T., Fairbanks, L., Ellison, G.W., and Myers, L.W. (1987). Delta-9-THC in
the treatment of spasticity associated with multiple sclerosis. Advances in Alcohol and Substance Abuse,
7, 39–50.

Cannabis and Multiple Sclerosis

Vaney, C., Heinzel-Gutenbrunner, M., Jobin, P., et al. (2004). Efficacy, safety and tolerability of an orally
administered cannabis extract in the treatment of spasticity in patients with multiple sclerosis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. Multiple Sclerosis, 10, 417–424.
Visser, E.M., Wilde, K., Wilson, J.F., Yong, K.K., and Counsell, C.E. (2012). A new prevalence study
of multiple sclerosis in Orkney, Shetland and Aberdeen city. Journal of Neurology Neurosurgery and
Psychiatry, 83, 719–724.
Wade, D.T., Makela, P.M., House, H., Bateman, C., and Robson, P. (2006). Long-term use of a cannabisbased medicine in the treatment of spasticity and other symptoms in multiple sclerosis. Multiple
Sclerosis, 12, 639–645.
Wade, D.T., Makela, P., Robson, P., House, H., and Bateman, C. (2004). Do cannabis-based medicinal
extracts have general or specific effects on symptoms in multiple sclerosis? A double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled study on 160 patients. Multiple Sclerosis, 10, 434–441.
Wade, D.T., Robson, P., House, H., Makela, P., and Aram, J. (2003). A preliminary controlled study
to determine whether whole-plant cannabis extracts can improve intractable neurogenic symptoms.
Clinical Rehabilitation, 17, 21–29.
Weinshenker, B.G., Bass, B., Rice, G.P., et al. (1989). The natural history of multiple sclerosis: a geographically based study. I. Clinical course and disability. Brain, 112, 133–146.
Wilkinson, J.D., Whalley, B.J.,Baker, D., et al. (2003). Medicinal cannabis: is delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol
necessary for all its effects? Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 55, 1687–1694.
Willer, C.J., Dyment, D.A., Sadovnick, A.D., Rothwell, P.M., Murray, T.J., and Ebers, G.C; Canadian
Collaborative Study Group. (2005). Timing of birth and risk of multiple sclerosis: population based
study. British Medical Journal, 330, 120–123.
Wilson, R.I. and Nicoll, R.A. (2002). Endocannabinoid signalling in the brain. Science, 296, 678–682.
Wujek, J.R., Bjartmar, C., Richer, E., et al. (2002). Axon loss in the spinal cord determines permanent neurological disability in an animal model of multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental
Neurology, 61, 23–32.
Zajicek, J., Ball, S. and Wright, D., et al. on behalf of the CUPID investigator group. (2013). Effect of
dronabinol on progression in progressive multiple sclerosis (CUPID): a randomised, placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet Neurology, 12, 857–865.
Zajicek, J., Fox, P., Sanders, H., et al. (2003). Cannabinoids for treatment of spasticity and other symptoms
related to multiple sclerosis (CAMS study): multicentre randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet,
362, 1517–1526.
Zajicek, J.P., Hobart, J.C., Slade, A., Barnes, D., Mattison, P.G., and MUSEC Research Group. (2012).
Multiple sclerosis and extract of cannabis: results of the MUSEC trial. Journal of Neurology Neurosurgery
and Psychiatry, 83, 1125–1132.
Zajicek, J.P., Sanders, H.P., Wright, D.E., et al. (2005). Cannabinoids in multiple sclerosis (CAMS) study:
safety and efficacy data for 12 months follow up. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 76,
1664–1669.

501

Part 5

Some Potential
Therapeutic Targets
for Phytocannabinoids
Marnie Duncan

Part 5 Overview
In Chapter 27, Fernández Ruiz and colleagues describe the neuroprotective
actions of phytocannabinoids acting via components of the endocannabinoid
system as well as noncannabinoid targets. The authors also provide an
overview of preclinical work in Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease,
Alzheimer’s disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In Chapter 28, Parolaro, Zamberletti, and Rubino present available data
for the use of cannabinoids in psychosis. They review the preclinical models
available for the positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia and the
actions of phytocannabinoids in these models. The authors then present the
available clinical data for cannabidiol (CBD) and discuss putative mechanisms
of action for CBD in psychosis.
In Chapter 29, Murillo-Rodríguez and colleagues review the physiology of
sleep and provide an overview of sleep disorders. They present intriguing data
for phytocannabinoids where tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) has sleep-inducing
effects whereas CBD appears to promote alertness.
In Chapter 30, Williams, Jones, and Whalley provide an overview of
anecdotal cannabis use and clinical trials of CBD in epilepsy patients. They
also outline the various preclinical models of epilepsy and the actions of
phytocannabinoids in these models.
In Chapter 31, Pacher and Kunos provide an in-depth review of the actions
of CB1 and CB2 receptors in the cardiovascular system, metabolic system, liver
and kidney, and describe the signalling pathways involved.

504

Some Potential Therapeutic Targets for Phytocannabinoids

In Chapter 32, Oddi and Maccarrone describe the anatomy and physiology
of the skin, and the expression of the endocannabinoid system within the
skin. They present the pharmacological effects of phytocannabinoids in skin
pathophysiology including psoriasis, skin tumours, dermatitis, scleroderma, and
acne.
In Chapter 33, Xu and Azuara-Blanco provide an overview of the use of
cannabinoids in glaucoma, summarizing the available preclinical and clinical
data. The authors also review preclinical data generated in the research area of
diabetic retinopathy, age-related macular degeneration, and uveoretinitis and
discuss possible therapeutic potential.
In Chapter 34, Bab provides an in-depth overview of the skeletal
cannabinoid system highlighting the possibility of targeting the CB2 receptor
in both osteoporosis and metastatic bone cancer.
In Chapter 35, Velasco, Sánchez, and Guzmán review the current
preclinical literature for the actions of cannabinoids in a range of cancer
cells, with a focus on glioma. They describe the signalling pathways targets
by cannabinoids, and the ability of cannabinoids to inhibit tumor growth,
angiogenesis, and invasion. The authors report the findings of a Phase 1 study,
and speculate on the possibility of identifying biomarkers to determine if
patients would be responsive to cannabinoid therapies.

Chapter 27

Neurodegenerative Disorders Other
Than Multiple Sclerosis
Javier Fernández-Ruiz, Eva de Lago,
María Gómez-Ruiz, Concepción García,
Onintza Sagredo, and Moisés García-Arencibia

27.1 Introduction
Among the numerous cell and tissue functions assigned to the endocannabinoid system, the regulation of the cellular homeostasis, including the cellular decision of death/survival, appears to
be one of the most basic. This explains the notable cytoprotective properties exerted by different
phytocannabinoids, as well as by other related molecules that also target the endocannabinoid
system, in different pathological conditions. This is particularly relevant to the central nervous
system (CNS) (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2010), as loss of neurons constitutes an extremely difficult
problem because of the postmitotic characteristics of these cells and the present limitations of
adult brain neurogenesis. There are already numerous preclinical studies that have addressed the
ability of phytocannabinoids to protect not only neurons but also some glial cell subpopulations
from different types of insults. This places these molecules in a promising position to become
a novel form of therapy aimed at delaying/arresting disease progression in neurodegenerative
disorders (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2010). Phytocannabinoids appear to have a neuroprotective
potential equivalent to those therapeutic strategies based on antiexcitotoxic agents (e.g., glutamate receptor antagonists), calcium channel blockers (e.g., nimodipine), antioxidant compounds
(e.g., coenzyme Q10, N-acetylcysteine), anti-inflammatory substances (e.g., minocycline), and
other neuroprotective pharmacotherapies used as individual treatments. The advantage of phytocannabinoids is that they can combine all these properties in a single molecule or in a mixture
of two or more compounds. This is extremely important for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders in which neuronal damage is the consequence of the progressive combination of
different types of cytotoxic events—energy failure, excitotoxicity, mitochondrial dysfunction,
inflammation, and oxidative stress—that therefore demand the development of therapies based
on broad-spectrum compounds (“multitarget designed drugs”) or on the combination of different
therapeutic agents (Geldenhuys and Van der Schyf 2013).
There are three reasons why phytocannabinoids have this broad spectrum of neuroprotective properties. First, phytocannabinoids can target some components of the endocannabinoid
signaling system, for example, cannabinoid receptors type 1 and 2 (CB1 and CB2), and the enzyme,
fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), which play a key role in neuroprotective responses (Hill
et al. 2012). They can also act on other nonendocannabinoid molecular targets such as the nuclear
receptors of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) family (O’Sullivan and Kendall
2010) and/or some transcription factors (Iuvone et al. 2009; Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2013), which are

506

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

also key elements in the control of neuronal homeostasis and survival. Second, these molecular
targets appear to have a specific location in different cell substrates within the CNS, i.e., neurons,
astrocytes, resting and reactive microglia, perivascular microglial cells, oligodendrocytes, and
neural progenitor cells, thus enabling phytocannabinoids to exert a selective control of the specific
roles played by these cells in degenerative, protective and/or repair processes (Galve-Roperh et al.
2008). Lastly, by acting on the endocannabinoid system, some phytocannabinoids appear to be
able to pharmacologically mimic the ability of different elements of this signaling system to oppose
the effects of stimuli that damage the brain (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2010; Pacher and Mechoulam
2011). This activation has been found in most neurodegenerative diseases, either acute episodes or
chronic progressive disorders. For example, increased generation of endocannabinoids has been
detected in some neurodegenerative conditions including brain trauma in neonatal (Hansen et al.
2001) or adult (Panikashvili et al. 2001) rats, experimental parkinsonism in rats (Gubellini et al.
2002), and kainate-induced excitotoxicity in mice (Marsicano et al. 2003). Upregulation of CB1
receptors has been observed after experimental stroke (Jin et al. 2000), after excitotoxic stimuli in
neonatal rats (Hansen et al. 2001), after lesions of the substantia nigra that induce parkinsonism in
primates (Lastres-Becker et al. 2001), in the postmortem basal ganglia of Parkinson’s disease (PD)
patients (Lastres-Becker et al. 2001), and in the postmortem cerebellum of patients affected by
spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) (Rodríguez-Cueto et al. 2014). However, given that CB1 receptors
are preferentially located in neurons within the CNS including those that degenerate in most neurodegenerative disorders, the expected response of these receptors is normally markedly reduced
by the neuronal loss that occurs in these disorders. In those cases in which upregulation of CB1
receptors was found, this response appears to occur only in surviving neurons (i.e., SCAs) or in
neuronal subpopulations other than the one(s) affected by the disease (i.e., PD). This does not
happen in the case of CB2 receptors which display a marked upregulation that has been found in
all neurodegenerative disorders in which effects on these receptors have been investigated, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Huntington’s disease (HD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS),
which is also known as motor neuron disease, and other disorders (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2007,
2010). This also includes SCAs, which had not been investigated up to 2012 (Rodríguez-Cueto
et al. 2014), as well as PD (García et al. 2011; Price et al. 2009), in which the identification of this
response had remained elusive for various years. It is important to remark that CB2 receptors are,
in general, poorly concentrated in the brain in healthy conditions, being located preferentially in
astrocytes (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2010) and oligodendrocytes (Molina-Holgado et al. 2002), showing a relatively weak distribution in a few neuronal subpopulations (Atwood and Mackie 2010),
and being apparently absent from quiescent microglial cells (Sagredo et al. 2009; Stella 2010)
except some subpopulations of human perivascular microglial cells (Nuñez et al. 2004). As mentioned earlier, they upregulate in inflammatory, excitototoxic, infectious, traumatic, or oxidant
insults occurring in most neurodegenerative disorders, and this upregulation is extremely intense
in reactive microglial cells recruited at lesioned sites (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2007, 2010).
This chapter aims to bring together all information generated so far that supports promising
therapeutic applications of phytocannabinoids and related compounds for the treatment of conditions of acute or chronic neurodegeneration. To meet this objective, we have divided the chapter
into two parts. First, we have reviewed the different cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying
the neuroprotective effects of phytocannabinoids against neurodegenerative cellular events. Second,
we have provided an overview of additional information about these neuroprotective effects in
acute neurodegeneration, in particular in the two major accidental causes of this pathology, cerebral
ischemia and traumatic brain injury, and also in four chronic neurodegenerative disorders, AD, HD,
PD, and ALS, for which relevant information has been recently published, including clinical data.

Neurodegenerative Disorders Other Than Multiple Sclerosis

27.2 Mechanisms involved in neuroprotection

by phytocannabinoids

Cannabinoid receptor-dependent mechanisms

The molecular mechanisms underlying the neuroprotectant properties of phytocannabinoids
are quite diverse and, frequently, complementary. This broad-spectrum activity represents their
major advantage compared with other types of neuroprotective agents (a summary of all these
mechanisms is given in Fig. 27.1). These mechanisms include actions that do not involve components of the endocannabinoid system, particularly cannabinoid receptors, for example, the ability

Normalization of
glutamate homeostasis

Control of glial activation and toxicity
Glial cells

Neurons
CB1

CB2

γ
β

α

O
H

γ
β

α

OH
H

OH
H

H

Cannabinoid receptor-independent mechanisms

Inflammatory mediators
prosurvival factors

Glutamate toxicity

H

CBD

OH
H
H

O
Δ9-THC

O
Δ9-THCV

Unknown targets:
PPARs?

CB1

γ
β

α

ROS

Improvement of
antioxidant defenses

Nrf-2?

NFκB

Induction of
antioxidant enzymes

COX-2, iNOS

ROS

Inflammatory
mediators

Fig. 27.1 Molecular and cellular mechanisms proposed for the neuroprotective effects of
phytocannabinoids.

507

508

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

of certain cannabinoids to block N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, the antioxidant properties of most phytocannabinoids, their ability to bind nuclear receptors of the PPAR family, and
to affect some transcription factors (Iuvone et al. 2009; Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2013; O’Sullivan and
Kendall 2010). By contrast, they also include some responses that are definitively mediated by
either CB1 or CB2 receptors, for example, the ability of those phytocannabinoids targeting the CB1
receptor to improve blood supply to the injured brain in ischemic conditions (Fernández-Ruiz
et al. 2005) and, in particular, their ability to attenuate excitotoxic damage that occurs in most
acute or chronic neurodegenerative disorders (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2010). With regard to CB2
receptors, their activation plays an important role in the processes of glial activation and neuroinflammation that occur in most neurodegenerative disorders (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2007).
27.2.1 Neuroprotective effects of phytocannabinoids mediated

by CB1 receptors

The most important neuroprotective property of those phytocannabinoids targeting the CB 1
receptor is the normalization of glutamate homeostasis (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2010). Alterations
in this important excitatory neurotransmitter system in neurodegenerative disorders, a so-called
excitotoxicity process, consist of excessive extracellular levels of glutamate and hyperactivation of
glutamate receptors, mainly the ionotrophic receptors, resulting in an intracellular accumulation
of cytotoxic concentrations of calcium, which activate numerous destructive pathways, e.g., calpains, caspases, protein kinases, nitric oxide (NO) synthase, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and
others, leading to severe cell swelling and death (Doble 1999).
The activation of CB1 receptors opposes both glutamatergic cytotoxic events (Fernández-Ruiz
et al. 2010). On the one hand, it reduces the excessive glutamate release through CB1 receptors
located at the presynaptic level in glutamatergic terminals. On the other hand, it reduces the excessive intracellular levels of calcium through postsynaptic CB1 receptors (located on neurons containing NMDA receptors) that close voltage-dependent calcium channels, thereby reducing the
overall calcium current and the overactivation of destructive pathways. This information has been
collected both in vitro, e.g., from neuronal cultures (Abood et al. 2001; Shen and Thayer 1998),
rat brain slices (Hampson et al. 1998a), and in vivo, e.g., from rodent models of ischemic damage
(Nagayama et al. 1999) or neurotoxin lesions (Marsicano et al. 2003; van der Stelt et al. 2001).
In all cases, the participation of CB1 receptors has been strongly demonstrated by using either
selective CB1 receptor antagonists or mice genetically deficient in CB1 receptors (Fernández-Ruiz
et al. 2005, 2010).
Another CB1 receptor-mediated neuroprotective effect of phytocannabinoids, particularly
relevant in ischemia, is the improvement of blood supply to the injured brain, an effect that
is related to the reduction in the levels of some vasoconstrictor factors (Fernández-Ruiz et al.
2005). Brain damage occurring during stroke or traumatic injuries is associated with the release
of several endothelium-derived mediators (Madden 2012), in particular endothelin-1, which
produces vasoconstriction, thus limiting the blood supply to the injured area and thereby aggravating brain damage (Schinelli 2002). Different cannabinoids, including the phytocannabinoid
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC), are potent modulators of vascular tone (Wagner et al. 1998),
and therefore might provide neuroprotection in ischemic conditions by reducing endothelin1-induced vasoconstriction and by restoring blood supply to the injured brain (Mechoulam
et al. 2002). This effect appears to be mediated by CB1 receptors located in brain microvasculature
(Hillard 2000), as it was reversed by rimonabant (Chen et al. 2000). However, recent findings also
support an involvement of CB2 receptors (see section 27.3).

Neurodegenerative Disorders Other Than Multiple Sclerosis

27.2.2 Neuroprotective effects of phytocannabinoids mediated

by CB2 receptors

The key neuroprotective action of CB2 receptors is the control of glial influences on neurons
(Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2007, 2010). This does not exclude the possibility that CB1 receptors may
also be involved in some effects related to glial processes (de Lago et al. 2012; Molina-Holgado
et al. 2003; Smith et al. 2000), but the major contribution is made by CB2 receptors. The proliferation, recruitment, activation, and migration at lesioned sites of several glial subpopulations,
i.e., astrocytes, microglia, is an important event in acute and chronic brain degenerative pathologies (Khandelwal et al. 2011). They have been associated with inflammatory processes that may
induce or aggravate brain damage, although there are also positive effects associated with the proliferation of these glial cells (Wee Yong 2010). Classically, astrogliosis is regarded as being protective because of the positive influences exerted by astrocytes (e.g., trophic and metabolic support,
generation of prosurvival and neurotrophic factors; see Allaman et al. 2011), whereas the proliferation and activation of microglial cells from their quiescent phenotype to a reactive state has
been associated with greater neuronal injury (Cunningham 2013). However, there is also evidence
that some reactive astrocytes may damage neuronal homeostasis (Singh et al. 2011), whereas activated microglial cells may also exert positive effects on neuronal survival (Czeh et al. 2011). The
classic detrimental effects assigned to reactive microglial cells are exerted through the generation
of numerous neurotoxic mediators, including tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin
(IL)-1β, IL-6, eicosanoids, NO, and ROS, that impact on neurons and produce neuronal damage (Liu and Hong 2003). They can also impact on other neural cells to promote demyelination,
thrombosis, leukocyte infiltration, and blood–brain barrier disruption (Liu and Hong 2003).
As previously mentioned, targeting CB2 receptors may serve to modulate glial events. This
includes CB2 receptors located in microglial cells, where these receptors play an important role
in the proliferation and migration of these cells at lesion sites (Carrier et al. 2004; Walter et al.
2003). They also reduce the production by reactive microglial cells of a plethora of factors that
damage neurons (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2007, 2010). Of particular interest is the inhibitory effect
on the production of TNF-α, as this is a major contributor to the pathophysiology of brain injury
(Stella 2010). This inhibitory effect possibly involves the inhibition of the nuclear factor kappa
B (NF-κB) (Oh et al. 2010), a transcription factor that is critically involved in proinflammatory
responses. However, cannabinoids that do not activate the CB2 receptor, for example, the phytocannabinoid cannabidiol (CBD) or the inactive synthetic cannabinoid dexanabinol (HU-211), are
also able to inhibit this transcription factor (Jüttler et al. 2004; Kozela et al. 2010; Shohami and
Mechoulam 2000), presumably because of their activity at nuclear receptors of the PPAR family
(O’Sullivan and Kendall 2010; Stahel et al. 2008) that also control NF-κB signaling (Chung et al.
2008; Stahel et al. 2008).
The activation of CB2 receptors, presumably located in astrocytes, may also serve to improve
neuronal homeostasis, although this possibility remains controversial because of the possible
participation of CB1 receptors alone or even in combination with CB2 receptors (FernándezRuiz et al. 2007, 2010; Stella 2010). Targeting CB2 receptors in astrocytes would increase the
supply of metabolic substrates (e.g., lactate, ketone bodies) or the generation of neurotrophins
(e.g., GDNF), anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1 receptor antagonist) and other prosurvival
molecules (e.g., transforming growth factor-beta) by astrocytes (Molina-Holgado et al. 2003;
Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2007, 2010; Stella 2010). In addition, targeting CB2 receptors also protects
astrocytes and even oligodendrocytes from death, which is also beneficial for neurons (Gómez del
Pulgar et al. 2002; Molina-Holgado et al. 2002).

509

510

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

27.2.3 Neuroprotective effects of phytocannabinoids which

are independent of CB1 and CB2 receptors

The neuroprotective effects of phytocannabinoids also include some responses that are not mediated by classic targets within the endocannabinoid system, for example, the antioxidant properties of most of them, their ability to bind nuclear receptors of the PPAR family and to affect
some transcription factors (Iuvone et al. 2009; Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2013; O’Sullivan and Kendall
2010). An interesting compound is CBD, a phytocannabinoid with a broad spectrum of potential
therapeutic applications, including neuroprotective effects, but poor affinity for CB1 and CB2
receptors (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2013). Therefore, its neuroprotective effects cannot be attributed
to the control of excitotoxicity via the direct activation of CB1 receptors and/or to the control
of microglial toxicity via the direct activation of CB2 receptors. However, CBD is no less active
against the brain damage produced by alterations in glutamate homeostasis (El-Remessy et al.
2003; Hampson et al. 2000), oxidative stress (Hampson et al. 1998b; Marsicano et al. 2002) and
local inflammatory events (Martín-Moreno et al. 2011; Ruiz-Valdepeñas et al. 2011) than other
cannabinoids that can activate these receptors. These effects of CBD may be explained by its ability to inhibit endocannabinoid inactivation (Bisogno et al. 2001; Leweke et al. 2012), which may
enhance the action of endocannabinoids at their different receptors. However, CBD has other
properties that may contribute more to its neuroprotective effects. On the one hand, it is frequently
assumed that the neuroprotective effects of CBD are related to its innate chemical properties, in
particular the presence of two hydroxyl groups that enables CBD to have an important antioxidant activity, rather than due to pharmacodynamic events and/or activation of specific signaling
pathways. The antioxidant activity of CBD is comparable, and, even superior, to classic dietary
antioxidants such as ascorbate and α-tocopherol (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2013). CBD works well
against the accumulation of harmful oxidative products, which are highly produced in response to
excitotoxicity and/or mitochondrial dysfunction (Lenaz 2012). This antioxidant capability seems
also to be possessed by other structurally-similar compounds, e.g., Δ9-THC, cannabinol (CBN),
nabilone, levonantradol, and dexanabinol (Marsicano et al. 2002), presumably because it depends
on the presence of phenolic groups and is cannabinoid receptor-independent (Fernández-Ruiz
et al. 2013). In comparison with CBD, Δ9-THC has an equivalent antioxidant activity. However,
CBD is significantly superior to Δ9-THC as a potential antioxidant medicine. Thus, since it lacks
psychoactivity and tolerance to it does not develop, CBD can be used at higher doses and for longer
times than those possible with Δ9-THC (Malfait et al. 2000). In addition to this ROS scavenger
action, phytocannabinoids may also be antioxidant by activating intracellular mechanisms that
control the availability of endogenous antioxidant defenses, in particular the signaling triggered
by the transcription factor nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf-2), which plays a major
role in the control of antioxidant-response elements located in genes encoding for different phase
II antioxidant enzymes. In this case, phytocannabinoids may to bind to an intracellular target, presently unknown, linked to the regulation of this transcription factor (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2013).
On the other hand, despite its lack of activity at CB2 receptors, CBD elicits the same responses
as CB2 agonists, i.e., it reduces microglial cell migration (Walter et al. 2003) and the production of
proinflammatory mediators by these cells (Esposito et al. 2007), like cannabinoid compounds targeting the CB2 receptor (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2007). A key element in this CBD effect is the inhibitory control of NFκB signaling and the control of those genes regulated by this transcription factor
(e.g., inducible NO synthase) (Esposito et al. 2006a, 2007). This may be related to the ability of
CBD (like other phytocannabinoids) to bind to the nuclear receptors of the PPAR family (Esposito
et al. 2011; O’Sullivan and Kendall 2010) and to regulate their downstream signals, i.e., inhibition

Neurodegenerative Disorders Other Than Multiple Sclerosis

of NFκB leading to low expression of proinflammatory enzymes (cyclooxygenase-2, inducible NO
synthase), proinflammatory cytokines, and metalloproteases.

27.3 Phytocannabinoids in ischemia, brain trauma,

and spinal injury
Acute neurodegeneration, resulting from brain trauma, spinal cord injury, perinatal hypoxiaischemia, or ischemic stroke, is associated with high morbidity and mortality. It is also a major
cause of permanent disability, and thus it represents a significant socioeconomic challenge worldwide. The primary injury leads to secondary damage characterized by a complex of harmful
pathways including neuroinflammation, glutamatergic excitotoxicity, calcium influx, caspase
activation, vasoconstriction, and oxidative stress (Moskowitz et al. 2010). Various neuroprotective drugs acting through specific pathological mechanisms, including anti-inflammatory drugs,
antiglutamatergic compounds, calcium-channel blockers, vasodilators, and antioxidants, have
been tested for their ability to reduce this secondary damage. None of them have shown a significant effect (Beauchamp et al. 2008), and it is now accepted that therapeutic approaches must
be aimed at finding drugs that can act on different cytotoxic pathways simultaneously, and this
is why phytocannabinoids are considered good candidates and have been significantly studied in
preclinical models over the last 15 years. In vivo, treatment with different cannabinoids, including
the phytocannabinoids Δ9-THC and CBD, reduced lesion expansion and neurological deficits
in animal models of acute neurodegeneration: (1) rodents with global (Braida et al. 2000; Louw
et al. 2000; Nagayama et al. 1999; Suzuki et al. 2012; Zani et al. 2007) or focal (Hayakawa et al. 2004;
Leker et al. 2003; Mauler et al. 2003; Nagayama et al. 1999) ischemia, (2) rats with contusive spinal
cord injury (Arévalo-Martin et al. 2010), (3) mouse models of close head injury (Panikashvili
et al. 2001), and (4) newborn animals with hypoxia-ischemia (Alvarez et al. 2008; Lafuente et al.
2011; Pazos et al. 2012). These neuroprotective effects have been confirmed in different in vitro
experiments using cultured neurons subjected to hypoxia and/or glucose deprivation, or exposed
to excitotoxic stimuli, conditions that reproduce the key cytotoxic events involved in acute neurodegeneration, and in all cases cannabinoids, including the phytocannabinoids Δ 9-THC and
CBD, were effective in preserving neuronal survival (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2005; Hampson and
Grimaldi 2001; Hampson et al. 1998b; Marsicano et al. 2002; Shen and Thayer 1998; Sinor et al.
2000; Skaper et al. 1996).
Despite a few articles showing the opposite (Nagayama et al. 1999; Sinor et al. 2000), most
studies have indicated that CB1 receptor-mediated reduction of excitotoxicity is the main mechanism by which cannabinoids provide protection in acute neurodegeneration, as CB1 receptor
antagonists attenuated most of these neuroprotective effects (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2005). Further
support has come from a study using CB1 knockout mice, which showed increased mortality from
permanent focal cerebral ischemia and larger infarcts after transient focal cerebral ischemia, compared with the wild-type mice (Parmentier-Batteur et al. 2002). However, there is also growing
evidence for the involvement of CB2 receptors, and even of receptor-independent mechanisms,
in some of these effects, particularly with regard to glial-mediated effects of cannabinoids in
ischemia or brain trauma (Capettini et al. 2012) or to the antioxidant activity of some phytocannabinoids like CBD (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2013), respectively.
Cannabinoids may also help to protect the brain against ischemia and traumatic brain injury by
attenuating blood–brain barrier damage (Amenta et al. 2012; Chi et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2009)
and by improving microcirculatory dysfunction (Zhang et al. 2009). These effects were initially

511

512

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

attributed to the activation of CB1 receptors (Chen et al. 2000), but CB2 receptors are also now
known to be involved (Amenta et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2009). Lastly, as well as being neuroprotective, cannabinoids can also reduce acute neurodegeneration by improving neural repair. Thus,
protection of oligodendrocyte precursor cells, promotion of oligodendrogenesis and enhancement of remyelination have been found in rat models of stroke (Sun et al. 2013a, 2013b) and also
in neonatal hypoxia-ischemia (Fernández-López et al. 2010) with the non-selective CB1/CB2 cannabinoid receptor agonist WIN55,212-2, raising the possibility that some phytocannabinoids may
act in this way as well to reduce neurodegeneration.
Therefore, this preclinical evidence appears promising and demands an urgent development
of clinical studies in patients. Unfortunately, such clinical development is still poor and only
dexanabinol has been tested in a Phase 3 clinical trial in patients affected by severe brain trauma
(Maas et al. 2006), and this study could not confirm the beneficial effects shown by dexanabinol
in animal models (Shohami et al. 1995) and in a previous Phase 2 clinical trial (Knoller et al.
2002). However, it should be noted that dexanabinol may be considered a cannabinoid because
of its chemical structure rather than its pharmacological properties, as it acts as a noncompetitive NMDA receptor antagonist but displays negligible activity at cannabinoid receptors
(Eshhar et al. 1995). Therefore novel clinical studies with stroke/brain trauma patients using
the phytocannabinoid combination of Sativex® might be interesting, as would clinical studies
conducted with neonatal ischemia patients using CBD alone in this case (Lafuente et al. 2011)
(see Fig. 27.2).

Alzheimer’s disease

CBD + Δ9-THC

Stroke/Brain trauma

Huntington’s disease
CBD + Δ9-THC

CBD + Δ9-THC

Phytocannabinoids
Δ9-THCV

CBD

Δ9-THCV + CBD
Parkinson’s disease

CBN

Neonatal ischemia

Δ9-THC

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

Fig. 27.2 Summary of phytocannabinoids and their combinations that appear to be most suitable
for clinical evaluation as neuroprotective therapies in different neurodegenerative disorders.

Neurodegenerative Disorders Other Than Multiple Sclerosis

27.4 Phytocannabinoids in Huntington’s disease
Huntington’s disease is an inherited chronic progressive neurodegenerative disorder caused by
a mutation in the huntingtin gene (IT15), which consists of an excessive repetition of the CAG
triplet (>35) resulting in an expansion of glutamines in the amino-terminal portion of the huntingtin protein (Arrasate and Finkbeiner 2012). Huntingtin is widely distributed throughout the
body, in particular within the CNS, and its function seems to be related to intracellular vesicular
trafficking (Caviston and Holzbaur 2009), mitochondrial energy metabolism (Cattaneo et al.
2005), transcription of key genes, e.g., brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (Zuccato et al.
2001), and regulation of apoptosis (Luo and Rubinsztein 2009). Accordingly, the toxicity of the
mutated huntingtin progresses through the aggregation of proteolytic fragments of mutant huntingtin, transcriptional dysregulation, mitochondrial dysfunction and energy depletion, occurrence of excitotoxic and oxidative events, and glial activation/local inflammatory episodes (Ross
and Tabrizi 2011; Walker 2007). Despite its ubiquitous distribution, the mutant huntingtin affects
preferentially the medium spiny GABAergic striatal neurons, an effect associated with the characteristic “choreic” movements that appear in early stages of the disease (Ross and Tabrizi 2011), and
also the glutamatergic neurons that project from the cortex to the striatum and that are associated
with the cognitive dysfunctions and psychiatric symptoms that also appear in HD (Walker 2007).
The first therapies investigated in HD attempted to alleviate the choreic movements, using
antidopaminergic agents (Factor and Friedman 1997), although the only medicine approved is
tetrabenazine, an inhibitor of the monoamine vesicular transporter, with modest effects in HD
patients (Chen et al. 2012). There are still no approved therapies aimed at modifying the progression of HD, although antiglutamatergic agents were investigated for many years (Kieburtz et al.
1999). Recently, attempts have been made to inhibit the aggregation of mutant huntingtin (e.g.,
autophagy enhancers), to normalize transcriptional dysregulation (e.g., inhibitors of histone
deacetylases), to reduce inflammatory (e.g., minocycline) and oxidative (e.g., cysteamine) events,
to ameliorate energy depletion (e.g., coenzyme Q10, creatine), or to improve lipid dysregulation (e.g., unsaturated fatty acids). Some of these compounds have yielded promising results in
preclinical studies and they are presently being investigated at the clinical level (Butler and Bates
2006; Ha and Fung 2012; Venuto et al. 2012).
Phytocannabinoids have also been proposed as candidates for a neuroprotective therapy in
HD and this involves both CB1 and CB2 receptors and also receptor-independent mechanisms
(Sagredo et al. 2012). In fact, there is evidence indicating that defects in CB1 receptor signaling in
the basal ganglia might trigger an imbalance in glutamate homeostasis and initiate excitotoxicity
(Blázquez et al., 2011), so that the early stimulation of these receptors might reduce the progression of striatal degeneration associated with excitotoxicity (Blázquez et al., 2011; Pintor et al.
2006). By contrast, CB2 receptors appear to be upregulated in astrocytes and reactive microglial
cells recruited at the lesioned striatum (Bouchard et al. 2012; Palazuelos et al. 2009; Sagredo
et al. 2009). Interestingly, targeting these receptors protects striatal projection neurons from
death, presumably by enhancing the trophic support exerted by astrocytes and, in particular, by
reducing the toxicity of reactive microglial cells (Palazuelos et al. 2009; Sagredo et al. 2009).
In addition to targeting CB1 and/or CB2 receptors, certain phytocannabinoids, particularly
those devoid of activity at the classic cannabinoid receptors such as CBD, have been found to
be highly active in animal models of HD (Sagredo et al. 2007, 2011; Valdeolivas et al. 2012). As
has been outlined in section 27.2.3, these effects are directly linked to the control of oxidative
stress, which is an important cytotoxic mechanism involved in the pathogenesis of HD. These
experiments have been frequently conducted in rats lesioned with the irreversible mitochondrial

513

514

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

complex II inhibitor, 3-nitropropionate, which damages the mitochondria and elevates the generation of ROS in parallel to the activation of the calcium-binding protein calpain. CBD was
neuroprotective in this model, either in the form of pure compound (Sagredo et al. 2007) or as an
enriched botanical extract, alone or combined with Δ9-THC-enriched botanical extract (Sagredo
et al. 2011). Δ9-THC by itself was also active in both forms (Lastres-Becker et al. 2004; Sagredo
et al. 2011).
Therefore, the evidence derived from these pharmacological studies suggests that a
cannabinoid-­based neuroprotective therapy in HD patients should be based on targeting both
CB1 (to reduce excitotoxicity) and CB2 (to attenuate inflammation) receptors, as well as other
cannabinoid receptor-independent processes (to decrease oxidative injury). With this idea in
mind, a clinical study has been recently conducted in HD patients (NCT01502046) to determine
the neuroprotective effect of the phytocannabinoid-based medicine Sativex® (see Fig. 27.2). This
has been the first clinical study conducted in HD patients with cannabinoids that monitored
their effects on HD progression: previous clinical studies focused only on the relief of symptoms
such as chorea (Consroe et al. 1991; Curtis and Rickards 2006; Curtis et al. 2009; Müller-Vahl
et al. 1999). The clinical trial with Sativex® demonstrated that this cannabinoid-based medicine
was safe and well-tolerated in HD patients, but, unfortunately, there was no evidence of slower
disease progression.

27.5 Phytocannabinoids in Parkinson’s disease
Parkinson’s disease is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the
occurrence of bradykinesia, resting tremor, rigidity, and postural disturbances (Mazzoni et al.
2012). These symptoms are the consequence of the progressive degeneration of dopaminergic
neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (Blandini et al. 2000) caused by oxidative stress,
mitochondrial dysfunction, protein aggregation, and inflammatory stimuli, presumably triggered by genetic risk factors in combination with environmental factors (Surmeier and Sulzer
2013). Different therapeutic strategies have been investigated, and in some cases approved, for
the treatment of PD patients, including: (1) stimulation of specific basal ganglia structures (e.g.,
bilateral stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus or the medial globus pallidus, deep brain stimulation), (2) replacement of degenerated neurons with dopamine-producing cells (e.g., chromaffin
cells, embryonic neurons, differentiated stem cells), and (3) pharmacological treatments aimed
at relieving specific motor symptoms (e.g., levodopa, dopamine agonists, MAO-B inhibitors),
although they produce some unwanted side effects (Jankovic and Poewe 2012). The therapies
investigated in PD patients also include neuroprotective strategies to slowdown the progression of
striatal dopaminergic denervation and nigral degeneration (Santos 2012), although the evidence
collected so far is controversial.
Phytocannabinoids have also been proposed as a promising disease-modifying therapy in
PD (García-Arencibia et al. 2009), in particular CBD and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabivarin (Δ9THCV). Both phytocannabinoids were neuroprotective in 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats due
to their cannabinoid receptor-independent antioxidant properties (García et al. 2011; LastresBecker et al. 2005). Similar effects have also been described for other antioxidant phytocannabinoids such as Δ9-THC (Lastres-Becker et al. 2005). The activation of CB1 receptors may
also provide neuroprotection in PD. In fact, mice lacking this receptor were more sensitive to
6-hydroxydopamine (Pérez-Rial et al. 2011), whereas targeting the CB1 receptor preserved dopaminergic neurons in MPTP-lesioned mice (Chung et al. 2011). However, a neuroprotective strategy based on targeting the CB1 receptor (e.g., with Δ9-THC) might have some disadvantages in

Neurodegenerative Disorders Other Than Multiple Sclerosis

PD, given that the activation of this receptor may worsen specific parkinsonian symptoms, e.g.,
bradykinesia (Garcia-Arencibia et al. 2009). By contrast, Δ9-THCV, which is also antioxidant in
6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats (García et al. 2011), may be a better option for PD as it behaves
as a CB1 receptor antagonist (Hill et al. 2012) and these antagonists have shown benefits in the
reduction of parkinsonian bradykinesia (Fernández-Ruiz 2009).
The anti-inflammatory efficacy of certain phytocannabinoids, dependent on the activation
of CB2 receptors, but also on NFκB signaling, extended to the neuroinflammatory component
of PD. In fact, overexpresssion of CB2 receptors in mice protected against 6-hydroxydopamine
(Ternianov et al. 2012), and these receptors were particularly important in inflammatory models
of PD (e.g., LPS-lesioned rodents) (Chung et al. 2012; García et al. 2011). Compounds activating
these receptors, such as the CB2-selective agonist HU-308 or the phytocannabinoid Δ9-THCV,
preserved dopaminergic neurons in LPS-lesioned mice, whereas CB2 receptor-deficient mice
were more vulnerable to LPS than wild-type animals (García et al. 2011). Similar effects were also
found in MPTP-lesioned mice (Price et al. 2009).
Therefore, it seems obvious that phytocannabinoids constitute potential novel neuroprotective
therapies for PD. The emphasis should be put on their antioxidant profile and/or their effects on
CB2 receptors, and on trying to minimize effects derived from the direct activation of CB1 receptors.
In this context, the phytocannabinoid Δ9-THCV emerges as an interesting compound to be used
alone or in combination with CBD, demanding a prompt investigation in patients (see Fig. 27.2).

27.6 Phytocannabinoids in Alzheimer’s disease
Alzheimer’s disease affects more than 25 million people worldwide and its incidence is expected
to grow in years to come, given the increase in life expectancy in developed countries. AD is clinically defined by the progressive deterioration of cognition and memory (Minati et al. 2009). The
pathological hallmarks of AD include deposition of β-amyloid protein in senile plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and selective synaptic degeneration resulting in the neuronal loss preferentially in
cortical and subcortical areas (Perl 2010). The majority of drugs currently in use for the treatment
of AD act as inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase (e.g., tacrine, donepezil, rivastigmine) (Savonenko
et al. 2012) or by blocking NMDA receptors (e.g., memantine) (Danysz and Parsons 2012). Strong
efforts are being made to find new disease-modifying treatments based on inhibiting the aberrant processing leading to β-amyloid peptide generation, reducing β-amyloid peptide aggregation
and deposition, or facilitating its brain clearance (Corbett et al. 2012), as well as on inhibiting the
kinases involved in the hyperphosphorylation of tau protein (Medina et al. 2011).
Phytocannabinoids are also being investigated as a novel disease-modifying therapy in AD
and, as in other disorders, their therapeutic advantage is based on their widespread effects against
excitotoxicity, oxidative stress and inflammation (Gowran et al. 2011; Karl et al. 2012). However,
certain phytocannabinoids may also affect the processing, aggregation and clearance of β-amyloid
protein, which represents an additional target specific for AD. This is the case for Δ9-THC which
exhibits some ability to inhibit acetylcholinesterase activity (Eubanks et al. 2006). This additional
action of Δ9-THC is presently being exploited through the design of novel compounds that are
capable of producing all of its likely AD-ameliorating actions (González-Naranjo et al. 2013).
Another important phytocannabinoid for AD is CBD (Iuvone et al. 2009), which is active in
the prevention of glutamate-induced toxicity, oxidative damage, and inflammatory responses
induced by β-amyloid protein in vitro (Iuvone et al. 2004) and in vivo (Esposito et al. 2007;
Martin-Moreno et al. 2011). CBD was also active against β-amyloid protein-induced tau protein
hyperphosphorylation by glycogen synthase kinase-3β (Esposito et al. 2006b).

515

516

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Based on the potential shown by Δ9-THC and CBD in experimental AD, the combination
of both phytocannabinoids (i.e., Sativex®) may be useful for the treatment of AD patients (see
Fig. 27.2), even though the activation of CB1 receptors by Δ9-THC may worsen some symptoms
such as memory deficits. However, no clinical investigation of this possibility has yet been made
(Gowran et al. 2010; Karl et al. 2012). The only clinical studies performed so far have been a small
number that used dronabinol, an oil-based solution of synthetic Δ 9-THC, which was found to
ameliorate only some AD-related symptoms (Volicer et al. 1997; Walther et al. 2006).

27.7 Phytocannabinoids in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as motor neuron disease, is a fatal neurodegenerative
disorder characterized by the selective injury and death of motor neurons in the spinal cord,
brainstem, and motor cortex (Ferraiuolo et al. 2011). Most cases of ALS are sporadic (90%) with
an etiology still unknown, but the disease also includes familial cases (10%) caused by mutations
in specific genes (Ahmed and Wicklund 2011). This includes mutations in superoxide dismutase
1 (SOD-1), resulting in abnormal oxidative metabolism, as well as in the TAR DNA-binding protein-43 (TDP-43), leading to defects in RNA transcription, processing, and stability (Liscic and
Beljak 2011). Even though the pathogenic process remains to be completely elucidated, pathological mechanisms that operate in other chronic neurodegenerative disorders, such as oxidative
stress, excitotoxicity, neuroinflammation, protein aggregation and deposition, and dysregulation
of RNA transcription and processing (Ferraiuolo et al. 2011) have also been found in ALS. Riluzol
(Rilutek®) is the only therapy available for treatment of ALS patients. It is an antiglutamatergic
agent that acts by blocking voltage-dependent sodium channels located in motor neurons, thereby
reducing the activity of these neurons (Cheach et al. 2010). However, its effects are limited and
there is an urgent need for novel compounds for the treatment of ALS.
Data obtained using the G93A transgenic mouse that overexpresses a mutated form of human
SOD-1 support phytocannabinoids as a possible and promising therapeutic option for ALS
(Carter et al. 2010; Rossi et al. 2010). The first studies were conducted by Abood and coworkers
who observed that the administration of the phytocannabinoid Δ9-THC delayed motor impairment and increased survival in these mice (Raman et al. 2004). Δ9-THC was also effective in
reducing oxidative damage and excitotoxicity in spinal cord neuronal cultures (Raman et al.
2004). Similar results were obtained with the less psychotrophic phytocannabinoid CBN (Weydt
et al. 2005), and with synthetic cannabinoids (Bilsland et al. 2006; Kim et al. 2006; Shoemaker
et al. 2007). These pharmacological experiments have been paralleled by other studies using mice
deficient in specific endocannabinoid receptors or enzymes. Thus, the genetic ablation of the
FAAH enzyme, which leads to a permanent elevation of endocannabinoid levels, also delayed the
onset of the disease in SOD-1 mutant mice (observed in animals having the SOD-1 mutation and
genetic ablation of FAAH in comparison with classic SOD-1 mutant mice) but it did not affect
their survival (Bilsland et al. 2006). However, genetic ablation of the CB1 receptor had no effect
on the onset of the disease in SOD-1 mutant mice, although it did significantly extend life span
(Bilsland et al. 2006).
This topic has also been investigated at the clinical level. However, too few clinical data have yet
been generated to allow any firm conclusions to be drawn, prompting an urgent need for additional clinical investigation (Carter et al. 2010). A randomized, double-blind crossover trial conducted with oral Δ9-THC detected no effect on cramp frequency or intensity (Weber et al. 2010).
These results should, however, be interpreted with caution due to the small number of patients
recruited and the dose used. Two additional studies indicated good tolerability to Δ9-THC in ALS

Neurodegenerative Disorders Other Than Multiple Sclerosis

patients (Gelinas et al. 2002; Joerger et al. 2012), although a high interindividual variability was
found in Δ9-THC pharmacokinetics (Joerger et al. 2012).

27.8 Concluding remarks and future perspectives
Due to several of the pharmacological effects that they produce, phytocannabinoids have been
found to be potentially useful and clinically promising neuroprotective molecules. In this chapter,
we have reviewed the cellular and molecular mechanisms that might be involved in the neuroprotective effects of phytocannabinoids, putting emphasis on those effects induced by the activation
of CB1 receptors (e.g., reduction of excitotoxic stimuli produced either by inhibiting glutamate
release or by reducing NMDA receptor-induced calcium influx), by the activation of CB2 receptors (e.g., reduction of local inflammatory events resulting from the activation of glial elements),
or through other, cannabinoid receptor-independent, mechanisms (e.g., reduction of oxidative
injury by scavenging ROS or by inducing antioxidant defenses). Through one or more of these
effects, phytocannabinoids may provide neuroprotection in conditions of acute pathological or
accidental neurodegeneration, such as that occurring in ischemia, brain trauma, or spinal lesion.
They might also come to be used to delay/arrest the progression of neurodegeneration in chronic
diseases affecting cognitive processes, such as AD, or motor control or performance, such as PD,
HD, and ALS. It is important to note that most of the studies so far carried out to investigate phytocannabinoids as potential medicines for the treatment of these diseases have been preclinical
and that these studies have already provided sufficient solid evidence to justify the progression of
these molecules, alone or in combination, from preclinical to clinical investigations.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by grants from CIBERNED (CB06/05/0089), MICINN
(SAF2009/11847 and SAF2012/39173) and CAM (S2011/BMD-2308).

References
Abood, M.E., Rizvi, G., Sallapudi, N., and McAllister, S.D. (2001). Activation of the CB1 cannabinoid
receptor protects cultured mouse spinal neurons against excitotoxicity. Neuroscience Letters, 309,
197–201.
Ahmed, A. and Wicklund, M.P. (2011). Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: what role does environment play?
Neurologic Clinics, 29, 689–711.
Allaman, I., Bélanger, M., and Magistretti, P.J. (2011). Astrocyte-neuron metabolic relationships: for better and for worse. Trends in Neurosciences, 34, 76–87.
Alvarez, F.J., Lafuente, H., Rey-Santano, M.C., et al. (2008). Neuroprotective effects of the nonpsychoactive cannabinoid cannabidiol in hypoxic-ischemic newborn piglets. Pediatric Research, 64, 653–658.
Amenta, P.S., Jallo, J.I., Tuma, R.F., and Elliott, M.B. (2012). A cannabinoid type 2 receptor agonist attenuates blood–brain barrier damage and neurodegeneration in a murine model of traumatic brain injury.
Journal of Neuroscience Research, 90, 2293–2305.
Arévalo-Martin, A., García-Ovejero, D., and Molina-Holgado, E. (2010). The endocannabinoid
2-­arachidonoylglycerol reduces lesion expansion and white matter damage after spinal cord injury.
Neurobiology of Disease, 38, 304–312.
Arrasate, M. and Finkbeiner, S. (2012). Protein aggregates in Huntington’s disease. Experimental
Neurology, 238, 1–11.
Atwood, B.K. and Mackie, K. (2010). CB2: a cannabinoid receptor with an identity crisis. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 160, 467–479.

517

518

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Beauchamp, K., Mutlak, H., Smith, W.R., Shohami, E., and Stahel, P.F. (2008). Pharmacology of traumatic brain injury: where is the “golden bullet”? Molecular Medicine, 14, 731–740.
Bilsland, L.G., Dick, J.R., Pryce, G., et al. (2006). Increasing cannabinoid levels by pharmacological and
genetic manipulation delay disease progression in SOD1 mice. FASEB Journal, 20, 1003–1005.
Bisogno, T., Hanus, L., De Petrocellis, L., et al. (2001). Molecular targets for cannabidiol and its synthetic
analogues: effects on vanilloid VR1 receptors and on the cellular uptake and enzymatic hydrolysis of
anandamide. British Journal of Pharmacology, 134, 845–852.
Blandini, F., Nappi, G., Tassorelli, C., and Martignoni, E. (2000). Functional changes in the basal ganglia
circuitry in Parkinson’s disease. Progress in Neurobiology, 62, 63–88.
Blázquez, C., Chiarlone, A., Sagredo, O., et al. (2011). Loss of striatal type 1 cannabinoid receptors is a key
pathogenic factor in Huntington’s disease. Brain, 134, 119–136.
Bouchard, J., Truong, J., Bouchard, K., et al. (2012). Cannabinoid receptor 2 signaling in peripheral
immune cells modulates disease onset and severity in mouse models of Huntington’s disease. Journal of
Neuroscience, 32, 18259–18268.
Braida, D., Pozzi, M., and Sala, M. (2000). CP 55,940 protects against ischemia-induced electroencephalographic flattening and hyperlocomotion in Mongolian gerbils. Neuroscience Letters, 296, 69–72.
Butler, R. and Bates, G.P. (2006). Histone deacetylase inhibitors as therapeutics for polyglutamine disorders. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7, 784–796.
Capettini, L.S., Savergnini, S.Q., da Silva, R.F., et al. (2012). Update on the role of cannabinoid receptors
after ischemic stroke. Mediators of Inflammation, 2012, 824093.
Carrier, E.J., Kearn, C.S., Barkmeier, A.J., et al. (2004). Cultured rat microglial cells synthesize the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonylglycerol, which increases proliferation via a CB2 receptor-dependent mechanism. Molecular Pharmacology, 65, 999–1007.
Carter, G.T., Abood, M.E., Aggarwal, S.K., and Weiss, M.D. (2010). Cannabis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: hypothetical and practical applications, and a call for clinical trials. American Journal of
Hospice & Palliative Care, 27, 347–356.
Cattaneo, E., Zuccato, C., and Tartari, M. (2005). Normal huntingtin function: an alternative approach to
Huntington’s disease. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6, 919–930.
Caviston, J.P. and Holzbaur, E.L. (2009). Huntingtin as an essential integrator of intracellular vesicular
trafficking. Trends in Cell Biology, 19, 147–155.
Cheah, B.C., Vucic, S., Krishnan, A.V., and Kiernan, M.C. (2010). Riluzole, neuroprotection and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 17, 1942–1949.
Chen, J.J., Ondo, W.G., Dashtipour, K., and Swope, D.M. (2012). Tetrabenazine for the treatment of
hyperkinetic movement disorders: a review of the literature. Clinical Therapeutics, 34, 1487–1504.
Chen, Y., McCarron, R.M., Ohara, Y., et al. (2000). Human brain capillary endothelium:
2-­arachidonoglycerol (endocannabinoid) interacts with endothelin-1. Circulation Research, 87, 323–327.
Chi, O.Z., Barsoum, S., Grayson, J., Hunter, C., Liu, X., and Weiss, H.R. (2012). Effects of cannabinoid
receptor agonist WIN 55,212-2 on blood-brain barrier disruption in focal cerebral ischemia in rats.
Pharmacology, 89, 333–338.
Chung, E.S., Bok, E., Chung, Y.C., Baik, H.H., and Jin, B.K. (2012). Cannabinoids prevent
lipopolysaccharide-­induced neurodegeneration in the rat substantia nigra in vivo through inhibition of
microglial activation and NADPH oxidase. Brain Research, 1451, 110–116.
Chung, J.H., Seo, A.Y., Chung, S.W., et al. (2008). Molecular mechanism of PPAR in the regulation of agerelated inflammation. Ageing Research Reviews, 7, 126–136.
Chung, Y.C., Bok, E., Huh, S.H., et al. (2011). Cannabinoid receptor type 1 protects nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons against MPTP neurotoxicity by inhibiting microglial activation. Journal of Immunology,
187, 6508–6517.

Neurodegenerative Disorders Other Than Multiple Sclerosis

Consroe, P., Laguna, J., Allender, J., et al. (1991). Controlled clinical trial of cannabidiol in Huntington’s
disease. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 40, 701–708.
Corbett, A., Smith, J., and Ballard, C. (2012). New and emerging treatments for Alzheimer’s disease. Expert
Review of Neurotherapeutics, 12, 535–543.
Cunningham, C. (2013). Microglia and neurodegeneration: the role of systemic inflammation. Glia, 61,
71–90.
Curtis, A., Mitchell, I., Patel, S., Ives, N., and Rickards, H. (2009). A pilot study using nabilone for symptomatic treatment in Huntington’s disease. Movement Disorders, 24, 2254–2259.
Curtis, A. and Rickards, H. (2006). Nabilone could treat chorea and irritability in Huntington’s disease.
Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 18, 553–554.
Czeh, M., Gressens, P., and Kaindl, A.M. (2011). The yin and yang of microglia. Developmental
Neuroscience, 33, 199–209.
Danysz, W. and Parsons, C.G. (2012). Alzheimer’s disease, β-amyloid, glutamate, NMDA receptors and
memantine – searching for the connections. British Journal of Pharmacology, 167, 324–352.
De Lago, E., Moreno-Martet, M., Cabranes, A., Ramos, J.A., and Fernández-Ruiz, J. (2012).
Cannabinoids ameliorate disease progression in a model of multiple sclerosis in mice, acting preferentially through CB1 receptor-mediated anti-inflammatory effects. Neuropharmacology, 62,
2299–2308.
Doble, A. (1999). The role of excitotoxicity in neurodegenerative disease: implications for therapy.
Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 81, 163–221.
El-Remessy, A.B., Khalil, I.E., Matragoon, S., et al. (2003). Neuroprotective effect of (-)Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol in N-methyl-D-aspartate-induced retinal neurotoxicity: involvement of peroxynitrite. American Journal of Pathology, 163, 1997–2008.
Eshhar, N., Striem, S., Kohen, R., Tirosh, O., and Biegon, A. (1995). Neuroprotective and antioxidant
activities of HU-211, a novel NMDA receptor antagonist. European Journal of Pharmacology, 283,
19–29.
Esposito, G., De Filippis, D., Carnuccio, R., Izzo, A.A., and Iuvone, T. (2006b). The marijuana component cannabidiol inhibits beta-amyloid-induced tau protein hyperphosphorylation through Wnt/betacatenin pathway rescue in PC12 cells. Journal of Molecular Medicine, 84, 253–258.
Esposito, G., De Filippis, D., Maiuri, M.C., De Stefano, D., Carnuccio, R., and Iuvone, T. (2006a).
Cannabidiol inhibits inducible nitric oxide synthase protein expression and nitric oxide production
in beta-amyloid stimulated PC12 neurons through p38 MAP kinase and NF-kappaB involvement.
Neuroscience Letters, 399, 91–95.
Esposito, G., Scuderi, C., Savani, C., et al. (2007). Cannabidiol in vivo blunts beta-amyloid induced
neuroinflammation by suppressing IL-1β and iNOS expression. British Journal of Pharmacology, 151,
1272–1279.
Esposito, G., Scuderi, C., Valenza, M., et al. (2011). Cannabidiol reduces Aβ-induced neuroinflammation
and promotes hippocampal neurogenesis through PPARγ involvement. PLoS One, 6, e28668.
Eubanks, L.M., Rogers, C.J., Beuscher, A.E., et al. (2006). A molecular link between the active component
of marijuana and Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Molecular Pharmaceutics, 3, 773–777.
Factor, S.A. and Friedman, J.H. (1997). The emerging role of clozapine in the treatment of movement disorders. Movement Disorders, 12, 483–496.
Fernández-López, D., Pradillo, J.M., García-Yébenes, I., Martínez-Orgado, J.A., Moro, M.A., and
Lizasoain, I. (2010). The cannabinoid WIN55212-2 promotes neural repair after neonatal hypoxiaischemia. Stroke, 41, 2956–2964.
Fernández-Ruiz, J. (2009). The endocannabinoid system as a target for the treatment of motor dysfunction.
British Journal of Pharmacology, 156, 1029–1040.

519

520

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Fernández-Ruiz, J., García, C., Sagredo, O., Gómez-Ruiz, M., and de Lago, E. (2010). The endocannabinoid system as a target for the treatment of neuronal damage. Expert Opinion in Therapeutic Targets, 14,
387–404.
Fernández-Ruiz, J., González, S., Romero, J., and Ramos, J.A. (2005). Cannabinoids in neurodegeneration and neuroprotection. In: R. Mechoulam (ed.). Cannabinoids as Therapeutics. Milestones in Drug
Therapy. Basel: Birkhaüser Verlag, pp. 79–109.
Fernández-Ruiz, J., Romero, J., Velasco, G., Tolón, R.M., Ramos, J.A., and Guzmán, M. (2007).
Cannabinoid CB2 receptor: a new target for controlling neural cell survival? Trends in Pharmacological
Sciences, 28, 39–45.
Fernández-Ruiz, J., Sagredo, O., Pazos, M.R., et al. (2013). Cannabidiol for neurodegenerative disorders:
important new clinical applications for this phytocannabinoid? British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology,
75, 323–333.
Ferraiuolo, L., Kirby, J., Grierson, A.J., Sendtner, M., and Shaw, P.J. (2011). Molecular pathways of motor
neuron injury in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature Reviews Neurology, 7, 616–630.
Galve-Roperh, I., Aguado, T., Palazuelos, J., and Guzmán, M. (2008). Mechanisms of control of neuron
survival by the endocannabinoid system. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 14, 2279–2288.
García, C., Palomo-Garo, C., García-Arencibia, M., Ramos, J.A., Pertwee, R.G., and Fernández-Ruiz, J.
(2011). Symptom-relieving and neuroprotective effects of the phytocannabinoid Δ9-THCV in animal
models of Parkinson’s disease. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1495–1506.
García-Arencibia, M., García, C., and Fernández-Ruiz, J. (2009). Cannabinoids and Parkinson’s disease.
CNS & Neurological Disorders – Drug Targets, 8, 432–439.
Geldenhuys, W.J. and Van der Schyf, C.J. (2013). Rationally designed multi-targeted agents against neurodegenerative diseases. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 20, 1662–1672.
Gelinas, D., Miller, R., and Abood, M. (2002). A pilot study of safety and tolerability of Δ9-THC (Marinol)
treatment for ALS. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Disorders, 3, 23.
Gómez Del Pulgar, T., De Ceballos, M.L., Guzmán, M., and Velasco, G. (2002). Cannabinoids protect
astrocytes from ceramide-induced apoptosis through the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B
pathway. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 277, 36527–36533.
González-Naranjo, P., Campillo, N.E., Pérez, C., and Páez, J.A. (2013). Multitarget cannabinoids as novel
strategy for Alzheimer disease. Current Alzheimer Research, 10, 229–239.
Gowran, A., Noonan, J., and Campbell, V.A. (2011). The multiplicity of action of cannabinoids: implications for treating neurodegeneration. CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics, 17, 637–644.
Gubellini, P., Picconi, B., Bari, M., et al. (2002), Experimental parkinsonism alters endocannabinoid degradation: implications for striatal glutamatergic transmission. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 6900–6907.
Ha, A.D. and Fung, V.S. (2012). Huntington’s disease. Current Opinion in Neurology, 25, 491–498.
Hampson, A.J., Bornheim, L.M., Scanziani, M., et al. (1998a). Dual effects of anandamide on NMDA
receptor-mediated responses and neurotransmission. Journal of Neurochemistry, 70, 671–676.
Hampson, A.J. and Grimaldi, M. (2001). Cannabinoid receptor activation and elevated cyclic AMP reduce
glutamate neurotoxicity. European Journal of Neuroscience, 13, 1529–1536.
Hampson, A.J., Grimaldi, M., Axelrod, J., and Wink, D. (1998b). Cannabidiol and (-) Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol are neuroprotective antioxidants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 95, 8268–8273.
Hampson, A.J., Grimaldi, M., Lolic, M., Wink, D., Rosenthal, R., and Axelrod, J. (2000). Neuroprotective
antioxidants from marijuana. Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 899, 274–282.
Hansen, H.H., Schmid, P.C., Bittigau, P., et al. (2001). Anandamide, but not 2-arachidonoylglycerol, accumulates during in vivo neurodegeneration. Journal of Neurochemistry, 78, 1415–1427.
Hayakawa, K., Mishima, K., Abe, K., et al. (2004). Cannabidiol prevents infarction via the non-CB1 cannabinoid receptor mechanism. Neuroreport, 15, 2381–2385.

Neurodegenerative Disorders Other Than Multiple Sclerosis

Hill, A.J., Williams, C.M., Whalley, B.J., and Stephens, G.J. (2012). Phytocannabinoids as novel therapeutic agents in CNS disorders. Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 133, 79–97.
Hillard, C.J. (2000). Endocannabinoids and vascular function. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, 294, 27–32.
Iuvone, T., Esposito, G., Esposito, R., Santamaria, R., Di Rosa, M., and Izzo, A.A. (2004). Neuroprotective
effect of cannabidiol, a non-psychoactive component from Cannabis sativa, on beta-amyloid-induced
toxicity in PC12 cells. Journal of Neurochemistry, 89, 134–141.
Iuvone, T., Esposito, G., De Filippis, D., Scuderi, C., and Steardo, L. (2009). Cannabidiol: a promising
drug for neurodegenerative disorders? CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics, 15, 65–75.
Jankovic, J. and Poewe, W. (2012). Therapies in Parkinson’s disease. Current Opinion in Neurology, 25,
433–447.
Jin, K.L., Mao, X.O., Goldsmith, P.C., and Greenberg, D.A. (2000). CB1 cannabinoid receptor induction
in experimental stroke. Annals of Neurology, 48, 257–261
Joerger, M., Wilkins, J., Fagagnini, S., et al. (2012). Single-dose pharmacokinetics and tolerability of oral
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Drug Metabolism Letters, 6,
102–108.
Jüttler, E., Potrovita, I., Tarabin, V., et al. (2004). The cannabinoid dexanabinol is an inhibitor of the
nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B). Neuropharmacology, 47, 580–592.
Karl, T., Cheng, D., Garner, B., and Arnold, J.C. (2012). The therapeutic potential of the endocannabinoid
system for Alzheimer’s disease. Expert Opinion in Therapeutic Targets, 16, 407–420.
Khandelwal, P.J., Herman, A.M., and Moussa, C.E. (2011). Inflammation in the early stages of neurodegenerative pathology. Journal of Neuroimmunology, 238, 1–11.
Kieburtz, K. (1999). Antiglutamate therapies in Huntington’s disease. Journal of Neural Transmission
55(Suppl.), 97–102.
Kim, K., Moore, D.H., Makriyannis, A., and Abood, M.E. (2006). AM1241, a cannabinoid CB2 receptor selective compound, delays disease progression in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
European Journal of Pharmacology, 542, 100–105.
Knoller, N., Levi, L., Shoshan, I., et al. (2002). Dexanabinol (HU-211) in the treatment of severe closed
head injury: a randomized, placebo controlled, phase II clinical trial. Critical Care Medicine, 30, 548–554.
Kozela, E., Pietr, M., Juknat, A., Rimmerman, N., Levy, R., and Vogel, Z. (2010). Cannabinoids Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol differentially inhibit the lipopolysaccharide-activated NF-kappaB
and interferon-β/STAT proinflammatory pathways in BV-2 microglial cells. Journal of Biological
Chemistry, 285, 1616–1626.
Lafuente, H., Alvarez, F.J., Pazos, M.R., et al. (2011). Cannabidiol reduces brain damage and improves
functional recovery after acute hypoxia-ischemia in newborn pigs. Pediatric Research, 70, 272–277.
Lastres-Becker, I., Bizat, N., Boyer, F., Hantraye, P., Fernández-Ruiz, J., and Brouillet, E. (2004).
Potential involvement of cannabinoid receptors in 3-nitropropionic acid toxicity in vivo: implication for
Huntington’s disease. Neuroreport, 15, 2375–2379.
Lastres-Becker, I., Cebeira, M., de Ceballos, M., et al. (2001). Increased cannabinoid CB1 receptor binding and activation of GTP-binding proteins in the basal ganglia of patients with Parkinson’s disease and
MPTP-treated marmosets. European Journal of Neuroscience, 14, 1827–1832.
Lastres-Becker, I., Molina-Holgado, F., Ramos, J.A., Mechoulam, R., and Fernández-Ruiz, J. (2005).
Cannabinoids provide neuroprotection against 6-hydroxydopamine toxicity in vivo and in vitro: relevance to Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiology of Disease, 19, 96–107.
Leker, R.R., Gai, N., Mechoulam, R., and Ovadia, H. (2003). Drug-induced hypothermia reduces ischemic
damage: effects of the cannabinoid HU-210. Stroke, 34, 2000–2006.
Lenaz, G. (2012). Mitochondria and reactive oxygen species. Which role in physiology and pathology?.
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology, 942, 93–136.

521

522

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Leweke, F.M., Piomelli, D., Pahlisch, F., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol enhances anandamide signaling and
alleviates psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. Translational Psychiatry, 2, e94.
Liscic, R.M. and Breljak, D. (2011). Molecular basis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Progress in
Neuropsychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 35, 370–372.
Liu, B. and Hong, J.S. (2003). Role of microglia in inflammation-mediated neurodegenerative diseases:
mechanisms and strategies for therapeutic intervention. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, 304, 1–7.
Louw, D.F., Yang, F.W., and Sutherland, G.R. (2000). The effect of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol on forebrain
ischemia in rat. Brain Research, 857, 183–187.
Luo, S. and Rubinsztein, D.C. (2009). Huntingtin promotes cell survival by preventing Pak2 cleavage.
Journal of Cell Science, 122, 875–885.
Maas, A.I.R., Murray, G., Henney, H., et al. (2006). Efficacy and safety of dexanabinol in severe traumatic
brain injury: results of a phase III randomised, placebo-controlled, clinical trial. Lancet Neurology, 5,
38–45.
Madden, J.A. (2012). Role of the vascular endothelium and plaque in acute ischemic stroke. Neurology, 79,
S58–S62.
Malfait, A.M., Gallily, R., Sumariwalla, P.F., et al. (2000). The nonpsychoactive cannabis constituent cannabidiol is an oral anti-arthritic therapeutic in murine collagen-induced arthritis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 97, 9561–9566.
Marsicano, G., Goodenough, S., Monory, K., et al. (2003). CB1 cannabinoid receptors and on-demand
defense against excitotoxicity. Science, 302, 84–88.
Marsicano, G., Moosmann, B., Hermann, H., Lutz, B., and Behl, C. (2002). Neuroprotective properties of
cannabinoids against oxidative stress: role of the cannabinoid receptor CB1. Journal of Neurochemistry,
80, 448–456.
Martín-Moreno, A.M., Reigada, D., Ramírez, B.G., et al. (2011). Cannabidiol and other cannabinoids reduce microglial activation in vitro and in vivo: relevance to Alzheimer’s disease. Molecular
Pharmacology, 79, 964–973.
Mauler, F., Hinz, V., Augstein, K.H., Fassbender, M., and Horvath, E. (2003). Neuroprotective and brain
edema reducing efficacy of the novel cannabinoid receptor agonist BAY38-7271. Brain Research, 989,
99–111.
Mazzoni, P., Shabbott, B., and Cortés, J.C. (2012). Motor control abnormalities in Parkinson’s disease.
Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, 2, a009282.
Mechoulam, R., Spatz, M., and Shohami, E. (2002). Endocannabinoids and neuroprotection. Science’s
STKE, 2002, re5.
Medina, M., Garrido, J.J., and Wandosell, F.G. (2011). Modulation of GSK-3 as a therapeutic strategy on
tau pathologies. Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience, 4, 24.
Minati, L., Edginton, T., Bruzzone, M.G., and Giaccone, G. (2009). Current concepts in Alzheimer’s disease:
a multidisciplinary review. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias, 24, 95–121.
Molina-Holgado, E., Vela, J.M., Arévalo-Martin, A., et al. (2002). Cannabinoids promote oligodendrocyte
progenitor survival: involvement of cannabinoid receptors and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase/Akt signaling. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 9742–9753.
Molina-Holgado, F., Pinteaux, E., Moore, J.D., et al. (2003). Endogenous interleukin-1 receptor antagonist
mediates anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective actions of cannabinoids in neurons and glia. Journal of
Neuroscience, 23, 6470–6474.
Moskowitz, M.A., Lo, E.H., and Iadecola, C. (2010). The science of stroke: mechanisms in search of treatments. Neuron, 67, 181–198.
Müller-Vahl, K.R., Schneider, U., and Emrich, H.M. (1999). Nabilone increases choreatic movements in
Huntington’s disease. Movement Disorders, 14, 1038–1040.

Neurodegenerative Disorders Other Than Multiple Sclerosis

Nagayama, T., Sinor, A.D., Simon, R.P., et al. (1999). Cannabinoids and neuroprotection in global and
focal cerebral ischemia and in neuronal cultures. Journal of Neuroscience, 19, 2987–2995.
Nuñez, E., Benito, C., Pazos, M.R., et al. (2004). Cannabinoid CB2 receptors are expressed by perivascular
microglial cells in the human brain: an immunohistochemical study. Synapse, 53, 208–213.
Oh, Y.T., Lee, J.Y., Lee, J., et al. (2010). Oleamide suppresses lipopolysaccharide-induced expression of
iNOS and COX-2 through inhibition of NFκB activation in BV2 murine microglial cells. Neuroscience
Letters, 474, 148–153.
O’Sullivan, S.E. and Kendall, D.A. (2010). Cannabinoid activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptors: potential for modulation of inflammatory disease. Immunobiology, 215, 611–616.
Pacher, P. and Mechoulam, R. (2011). Is lipid signaling through cannabinoid 2 receptors part of a protective system? Progress in Lipid Research, 50, 193–211.
Palazuelos, J., Aguado, T., Pazos, M.R., et al. (2009). Microglial CB2 cannabinoid receptors are neuroprotective in Huntington’s disease excitotoxicity. Brain, 132, 3152–3164.
Panikashvili, D., Simeonidou, C., Ben-Shabat, S., et al. (2001). An endogenous cannabinoid (2-AG) is
neuroprotective after brain injury. Nature, 413, 527–531.
Parmentier-Batteur, S., Jin, K., Mao, X.O., Xie, L., and Greenberg, D.A. (2002). Increased severity of
stroke in CB1 cannabinoid receptor knock-out mice. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 9771–9775.
Pazos, M.R., Cinquina, V., Gómez, A., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol administration after hypoxiaischemia to newborn rats reduces long-term brain injury and restores neurobehavioral function.
Neuropharmacology, 63, 776–783.
Pérez-Rial, S., García-Gutiérrez, M.S., Molina, J.A., et al. (2011). Increased vulnerability to
6-­hydroxydopamine lesion and reduced development of dyskinesias in mice lacking CB1 cannabinoid
receptors. Neurobiology of Aging, 32, 631–645.
Perl, D.P. (2010). Neuropathology of Alzheimer’s disease. Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine, 77, 32–42.
Pintor, A., Tebano, M.T., Martire, A., et al. (2006). The cannabinoid receptor agonist WIN 55,212-2 attenuates the effects induced by quinolinic acid in the rat striatum. Neuropharmacology, 51, 1004–1012.
Price, D.A., Martínez, A.A., Seillier, A., et al. (2009). WIN55,212-2, a cannabinoid receptor agonist, protects against nigrostriatal cell loss in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine mouse model of
Parkinson’s disease. European Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 2177–2186.
Raman, C., McAllister, S.D., Rizvi, G., Patel, S.G., Moore, D.H., and Abood, M.E. (2004). Amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis: delayed disease progression in mice by treatment with a cannabinoid. Amyotrophic
Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Disorders, 5, 33–39.
Rodríguez-Cueto, C., Benito, C., Fernández-Ruiz, J., Romero, J., Hernández-Gálvez, M., Gómez-Ruiz,
M. (2014). Changes in CB1 and CB2 receptors in the post-mortem cerebellum of humans affected by
spinocerebellar ataxias. British Journal of Pharmacology 171, 1472–1489.
Ross, C.A. and Tabrizi, S.J. (2011). Huntington’s disease: from molecular pathogenesis to clinical treatment. Lancet Neurology, 10, 83–98.
Rossi, S., Bernardi, G., and Centonze, D. (2010). The endocannabinoid system in the inflammatory and
neurodegenerative processes of multiple sclerosis and of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Experimental
Neurology, 224, 92–102.
Ruiz-Valdepeñas, L., Martínez-Orgado, J.A., Benito, C., Millán, A., Tolón, R.M., and Romero, J. (2011).
Cannabidiol reduces lipopolysaccharide-induced vascular changes and inflammation in the mouse
brain: an intravital microscopy study. Journal of Neuroinflammation, 8, 5.
Sagredo, O., González, S., Aroyo, I., et al. (2009). Cannabinoid CB2 receptor agonists protect the striatum
against malonate toxicity: relevance for Huntington’s disease. Glia, 57, 1154–1167.
Sagredo, O., Pazos, M.R., Satta, V., Ramos, J.A., Pertwee, R.G., and Fernández-Ruiz, J. (2011).
Neuroprotective effects of phytocannabinoid-based medicines in experimental models of Huntington’s
disease. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 89, 1509–1518.
Sagredo, O., Pazos, M.R., Valdeolivas, S., and Fernandez-Ruiz, J. (2012). Cannabinoids: novel medicines
for the treatment of Huntington’s disease. Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 7, 41–48.

523

524

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Sagredo, O., Ramos, J.A., Decio, A., Mechoulam, R., and Fernández-Ruiz, J. (2007). Cannabidiol reduced the
striatal atrophy caused 3-nitropropionic acid in vivo by mechanisms independent of the activation of cannabinoid, vanilloid TRPV1 and adenosine A2A receptors. European Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 843–851.
Santos, C.M. (2012). New agents promote neuroprotection in Parkinson’s disease models. CNS &
Neurological Disorders – Drug Targets, 11, 410–418.
Savonenko, A.V., Melnikova, T., Hiatt, A., et al. (2012). Alzheimer’s therapeutics: translation of preclinical
science to clinical drug development. Neuropsychopharmacology, 37, 261–277.
Schinelli, S. (2002). The brain endothelin system as potential target for brain-related pathologies. Current
Drug Targets. CNS Neurological Disorders, 1, 543–553.
Shen, M. and Thayer, S.A. (1998). Cannabinoid receptor agonists protect cultured rat hippocampal neurons from excitotoxicity. Molecular Pharmacology, 54, 459–462.
Shoemaker, J.L., Seely, K.A., Reed, R.L., Crow, J.P., and Prather, P.L. (2007). The CB2 cannabinoid agonist AM-1241 prolongs survival in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis when
initiated at symptom onset. Journal of Neurochemistry, 101, 87–98.
Shohami, E. and Mechoulam, R. (2000). A non-psychotropic cannabinoid with neuroprotective properties.
Drug Development Research, 50, 211–215.
Shohami, E., Novikov, M., and Bass, R. (1995). Long-term effect of HU-211, a novel competitive NMDA
antagonist, on motor and memory functions after closed head injury in the rat. Brain Research, 674, 55–62.
Singh, S., Swarnkar, S., Goswami, P., and Nath, C. (2011). Astrocytes and microglia: responses to neuropathological conditions. International Journal of Neuroscience, 121, 589–597.
Sinor, A.D., Irvin, S.M., and Greenberg, D.A. (2000). Endocannabinoids protect cerebral cortical neurons
from in vitro ischemia in rats. Neuroscience Letters, 278, 157–160.
Skaper, S.D., Buriani, A., Dal Toso, R., et al. (1996). The ALIAmide palmitoylethanolamide and cannabinoids,
but not anandamide, are protective in a delayed postglutamate paradigm of excitotoxic death in cerebellar granule neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 93, 3984–3989.
Smith, S.R., Terminelli, C., and Denhardt, G. (2000). Effects of cannabinoid receptor agonist and antagonist ligands on production of inflammatory cytokines and anti-inflammatory interleukin-10 in endotoxemic mice. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 293, 136–150.
Stahel, P.F., Smith, W.R., Bruchis, J., and Rabb, C.H. (2008). Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors:
“key” regulators of neuroinflammation after traumatic brain injury. PPAR Research, 2008, 538141.
Stella, N. (2009). Endocannabinoid signaling in microglial cells. Neuropharmacology, 56, 244–253.
Stella, N. (2010). Cannabinoid and cannabinoid-like receptors in microglia, astrocytes, and astrocytomas.
Glia, 58, 1017–1030.
Sun, J., Fang, Y., Chen, T., et al. (2013b). WIN55,212-2 promotes differentiation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells and improve remyelination through regulation of the phosphorylation level of the ERK 1/2
via cannabinoid receptor 1 after stroke-induced demyelination. Brain Research, 1491, 225–235.
Sun, J., Fang, Y., Ren, H., et al. (2013a). WIN55,212-2 protects oligodendrocyte precursor cells in stroke
penumbra following permanent focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Acta Pharmacologica Sinica, 34, 119–128.
Surmeier, D.J. and Sulzer, D. (2013). The pathology roadmap in Parkinson disease. Prion, 7, 85–91.
Suzuki, N., Suzuki, M., Murakami, K., Hamajo, K., Tsukamoto, T., and Shimojo, M. (2012).
Cerebroprotective effects of TAK-937, a cannabinoid receptor agonist, on ischemic brain damage in
middle cerebral artery occluded rats and non-human primates. Brain Research, 1430, 93–100.
Ternianov, A., Pérez-Ortiz, J.M., Solesio, M.E., et al. (2012). Overexpression of CB2 cannabinoid receptors
results in neuroprotection against behavioral and neurochemical alterations induced by intracaudate
administration of 6-hydroxydopamine. Neurobiology of Aging, 33, 421 e1–e16.
Valdeolivas, S., Satta, V., Pertwee, R.G., Fernández-Ruiz, J., and Sagredo, O. (2012). Sativex-like combination of phytocannabinoids is neuroprotective in malonate-lesioned rats, an inflammatory model of
Huntington’s disease: role of CB1 and CB2 receptors. ACS Chemical Neuroscience, 3, 400–406.

Neurodegenerative Disorders Other Than Multiple Sclerosis

Van der Stelt, M., Veldhuis, W.B., Bar, P.R., Veldink, G.A., Vliegenthart, J.F., and Nicolay, K. (2001).
Neuroprotection by Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, the main active compound in marijuana, against
ouabain-­induced in vivo excitotoxicity. Journal of Neuroscience, 21, 6475–6579.
Venuto, C.S., McGarry, A., Ma, Q., and Kieburtz, K. (2012). Pharmacologic approaches to the treatment
of Huntington’s disease. Movement Disorders, 27, 31–41.
Volicer, L., Stelly, M., Morris, J., McLaughlin, J., and Volicer, B.J. (1997). Effects of dronabinol on anorexia and disturbed behavior in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. International Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 12, 913–919.
Wagner, J.A., Varga, K., and Kunos, G. (1998). Cardiovascular actions of cannabinoids and their generation during shock. Journal of Molecular Medicine, 76, 824–836.
Walker, F.O. (2007). Huntington’s disease. Seminars in Neurology, 27, 143–150.
Walter, L., Franklin, A., Witting, A., et al. (2003). Nonpsychotropic cannabinoid receptors regulate
microglial cell migration. Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 1398–1405.
Walther, S., Mahlberg, R., Eichmann, U., and Kunz, D. (2006). Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol for nighttime
agitation in severe dementia. Psychopharmacology, 185, 524–528.
Weber, M., Goldman, B. and Truniger, S. (2010). Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) for cramps in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a randomised, double-blind crossover trial. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and
Psychiatry, 81, 1135–1140.
Wee Yong, V. (2010). Inflammation in neurological disorders: a help or a hindrance? Neuroscientist, 16,
408–420.
Weydt, P., Hong, S., Witting, A., Möller, T., Stella, N., and Kliot, M. (2005). Cannabinol delays symptom
onset in SOD1 (G93A) transgenic mice without affecting survival. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and
Other Motor Neuron Disorders, 6, 182–184.
Zani, A., Braida, D., Capurro, V., and Sala, M. (2007). Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and AM404 protect against cerebral ischaemia in gerbils through a mechanism involving cannabinoid and opioid receptors. British Journal of Pharmacology, 152, 1301–1311.
Zhang, M., Adler, M.W., Abood, M.E., Ganea, D., Jallo, J., and Tuma, R.F. (2009). CB2 receptor activation attenuates microcirculatory dysfunction during cerebral ischemic/reperfusion injury. Microvascular
Research, 78, 86–94.
Zuccato, C., Ciammola, A., Rigamonti, D., et al. (2001). Loss of huntingtin-mediated BDNF gene transcription in Huntington’s disease. Science, 293, 493–498.

525

Chapter 28

Cannabidiol/Phytocannabinoids:
A New Opportunity for Schizophrenia
Treatment?
Daniela Parolaro, Erica Zamberletti,
and Tiziana Rubino

28.1 Introduction
Schizophrenia is a heterogeneous and severe brain disease, whose etiology and pathophysiology is
still poorly understood (Broome et al. 2005), and the search for safe and effective drugs is hindered
by its complex nature. A large body of evidence suggests that dysregulations in several neurotransmitter systems, such as dopaminergic, glutamatergic, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic,
and serotoninergic systems, play a role in the development of the typical positive symptoms (hallucination, delusions, disordered thinking, and paranoia), negative symptoms (deficit in social
interaction, emotional expression, and motivation), and cognitive deficit associated with schizophrenia (Abi-Dargham and Guillin 2007). In recent years, the presence of dysregulations in the
endocannabinoid system (ECS) (both in terms of cannabinoid receptors type 1 and 2 (CB1/CB2)
and endocannabinoid levels) in animal models of psychosis as well as in schizophrenic patients
suggested an involvement of the ECS in the pathophysiology of this disease. Indeed, either downregulation, upregulation, or no change in the CB1 receptor was found in brain regions implicated
in schizophrenia, such as prefrontal cortex, basal ganglia, and hippocampus. Moreover, the presence of a negative correlation between cerebrospinal levels of the endocannabinoid anandamide
(AEA) and psychopathological symptoms in acute, nonmedicated schizophrenic patients suggests the existence of an “anandamidergic dysregulation” in schizophrenia (for a review, see
Zamberletti et al. 2012a). Further support for the involvement of the ECS in schizophrenia comes
from the observation that high rates of cannabis consumption have been observed in patients with
schizophrenia, and from prospective studies demonstrating an increased risk for schizophrenia in
subjects using cannabis most frequently (Henquet et al. 2005; Kuepper et al. 2011). Indeed, cannabis consumption may induce psychotic states in normal individuals (Bhattacharyya et al. 2009),
worsen psychotic symptoms in schizophrenic patients (D’Souza et al. 2005), and facilitate precipitation of schizophrenia in vulnerable individuals (Ferdinand et al. 2005). On the other hand,
the self-medication hypothesis predicts that individuals may be using cannabis largely because of
their predisposition to psychosis, in order to relieve negative symptoms and dysphoric states or
to alleviate the side effects associated with antipsychotic therapy (Dixon et al. 1990; Krystal et al.
1999; Schneier and Siris 1987). This discrepancy at the epidemiological level may be attributed
to the opposing actions on schizophrenia-related symptoms exerted by two phytocannabinoids
(pCBs), cannabidiol (CBD) and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), that are present in some
cannabis extracts. In fact, the psychotropic effects of cannabis are mainly produced by the plant

Cannabidiol/Phytocannabinoids: A New Opportunity for Schizophrenia Treatment?

cannabinoid THC, via partial agonistic effects at the central cannabinoid CB1 receptor (Pertwee
2008). In contrast, CBD has no psychotropic activity and has been found to be a weak antagonist
at the CB1 receptor thereby inhibiting some of the pharmacological effects of THC (Thomas et al.
2007). Indeed, the use of cannabis with high CBD content is associated with significantly lower
degrees of psychotic symptoms providing support for the antipsychotic potential of CBD (Di Forti
et al. 2009).
This chapter focuses on the emerging potential of CBD and, possibly, other pCBs as new therapeutic agents for psychosis, in particular schizophrenia, as indicated by data obtained using preclinical in vivo animal models and by available clinical data.

28.2 Methodological considerations on rodent models

of schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder comprising a broad spectrum of symptoms, some of which are uniquely human traits (such as disordered thoughts, verbal learning, and
memory), thus it is extremely difficult to develop an animal model that mimics this psychiatric
syndrome in its entirety. Therefore, research efforts have focused on the development of various
animal models based on both pharmacological and nonpharmacological manipulations seeking
to replicate specific symptoms observed in human patients. Accordingly, different behavioral
paradigms have been considered to be translational models to assess schizophrenia symptoms in
preclinical models.
The most widely used animal approaches are based on the dopaminergic or glutamatergic
hypothesis of schizophrenia, and on the observation that the dopaminergic agents, amphetamine, quinpirole, cocaine, and the noncompetitive blockers of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptors, MK801 and phencyclidine (PCP), induce hyperlocomotion and stereotyped behaviors,
resembling the positive symptoms of schizophrenia, and reduce the prepulse inhibition (PPI) of
the acoustic startle reflex, modelling the impairment of sensorimotor gating observed in schizophrenics. Moreover, NMDA receptor antagonists induce negative-like symptoms such as deficits
in social interaction, avolition, and cognitive impairment consistent with a schizophrenia-like
effect (Bubeníková-Valesová et al. 2008).
Nonpharmacological models based on the neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia
have been developed too. Early maternal deprivation produces behavioral abnormalities resembling schizophrenia, including cognitive deficits (Ellenbroek and Riva 2003, Llorente-Berzal
et al. 2011). Another neurodevelopmental model, the postweaning social isolation of rats, induces
social and cognitive impairments, aggressiveness, hyperlocomotion, and reduces PPI (Fone and
Porkess 2008).
Recently, genetic mouse models of schizophrenia have been developed based on candidate
susceptibility genes. To date, Disrupted in Schizophrenia-1, neuregulin-1 (Nrg1), and ERbB4
mutant mice are the most widely used. These animals exhibit behavioral abnormalities relevant to
schizophrenia, such as disrupted PPI and latent inhibition, as well as impaired working memory,
that can be partially reversed by antipsychotic treatment (Powell et al. 2009).
In conclusion, no single animal model is able to mirror all the complex sequelae of such a
complex and heterogeneous disease, and the strategy to improve our knowledge of schizophrenia
and find new therapeutic tools for it is to take into account more than one model. However, often
the preclinical data on pCBs have been demonstrated only in pharmacological models and thus,
although positive, need to be confirmed using other experimental manipulations in order to
strengthen their potential therapeutic application.

527

528

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

28.3 Preclinical data
28.3.1 Hyperactivity and stereotypy

Locomotor hyperactivity and stereotypy have been recognized to have some face validity as indicators of certain components of the positive symptoms of schizophrenia. The concept of testing
for locomotor hyperactivity is based upon the premises that stimulation of the dopaminergic D2
receptors (with amphetamine or apomorphine), activation of serotoninergic systems by direct
5-HT2A receptor agonists (with LSD or psilocybin) and blockade of NMDA receptors by drugs
such as ketamine and PCP in rodents lead to enhanced motor activity, specifically horizontal
locomotor activity, rearing, or, at higher doses, stereotyped behaviors. Most of these behaviors can
be measured using automated photocell cages and scored by observation. Moreover, it is possible
to perform a qualitative analysis of patterns and perseverative aspects of behavior, by measuring
and scoring stereotypies during the test session.
Converging lines of evidence support a potential antipsychotic activity for CBD in dopamineand glutamate-based animal models of hyperactivity. In a pioneering study by Zuardi et al.
(1991) the effect of CBD was compared with that of haloperidol in rats administered with apomorphine. These authors demonstrated that CBD was as effective as haloperidol in reducing the
occurrence of stereotyped behaviors. Moreover, in contrast to the typical antipsychotic, CBD
did not induce catalepsy even at the highest doses tested. The antipsychotic potential of CBD
was then confirmed by the work of Moreira and Guimarães (2005) that compared the ability of
CBD, haloperidol, and clozapine to prevent the hyperlocomotion induced by amphetamine or
ketamine in mice. They found that CBD inhibited the hyperlocomotion induced by amphetamine in mice in a dose-related manner. In addition, the drug also attenuated the hyperlocomotion induced by ketamine, expanding its antipsychotic-like effects to a glutamate-based model.
Only haloperidol induced catalepsy at doses that inhibited hyperlocomotion in mice, whereas
CBD, similarly to clozapine, did not, thus suggesting a profile similar to that of atypical antipsychotics. In contrast, more recently, the antipsychotic properties of CBD were not confirmed in a
glutamate-based animal model (Gururajan et al. 2011). In fact, in this study CBD failed to counteract the hyperlocomotion induced by MK801 administration in rats. Moreover, CBD per se
produced hyperactivity, showing therefore some propsychotic effects. The lack of effect of CBD
could be ascribed to the lower dose of CBD used in Gururajan’s study compared to the one used
in Zuardi’s work (30 mg/kg vs. 60 mg/kg, intraperitoneally (i.p.)). It is therefore conceivable
that higher doses of CBD are needed to reach a beneficial effect. However, more recently, the
same group demonstrated that CBD, at very low doses (1 and 3 mg/kg, i.p.), effectively inhibited
MK801-induced hyperlocomotion when tested in a novel experimental set-up that allowed
the authors to assess social behavior and locomotor behavior simultaneously (Gururajan et al.
2012).
Not only acute but also chronic CBD administration has been reported to exert antipsychotic
effects. Long et al. (2010) demonstrated that chronic CBD at a dose of 50 mg/kg i.p. attenuated
dexamphetamine-induced hyperlocomotion without altering baseline locomotor activity in mice.
Importantly, acute CBD both at low (1 mg/kg, i.p.) or high (50 mg/kg, i.p.) doses was not effective
in opposing dexamphetamine-induced hyperlocomotion. This last result does not replicate the
one reported by Moreira and Guimarães (2005), and the authors suggested that these discrepant
findings could be due to genetic differences between the mouse strains used in the two studies.
More recently, the same group demonstrated that both acute and chronic CBD did not reduce
hyperlocomotion in a genetic animal model of schizophrenia, the transmembrane domain neuregulin 1 heterozygous mutant (Nrg1 TM HET) mouse (Long et al. 2012).

Cannabidiol/Phytocannabinoids: A New Opportunity for Schizophrenia Treatment?

As a whole, the results published so far are still not conclusive but seem to support the view that
CBD could exhibit a pharmacological profile similar to that of atypical antipsychotic drugs, with
an even better side effect profile, since it induced no or very low side effects at its effective doses.
To date, no studies have investigated the ability of pCBs, other than CBD, in recovering hyperlocomotion and stereotypies. However, preliminary data from our group suggest that also other
nonpsychoactive phytocannabinoids, specifically delta-9-tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV) and
cannabigerol (CBG), even at very low doses, are effective in reverting phencyclidine-induced
hyperlocomotion and stereotyped behaviors in rats, without altering per se basal locomotion
(M. Gabaglio and D. Parolaro, personal communication).
28.3.2 Prepulse inhibition

Studies of sensorimotor gating of startle responses to strong exteroceptive stimuli offer unique
opportunities for cross-species explorations into information processing and attentional deficits
in schizophrenia. PPI is defined as the decrease in the acoustic startle response when a nonstartling prepulse is presented 30–500 ms before the startling pulse.
It is well known that marked deficits in PPI are present in chronic schizophrenic (Braff et al.
1999) as well as nonmedicated first-episode schizophrenic patients (Ludewig et al. 2003). Similar
deficits in PPI can be reproduced in rodents by pharmacological or developmental manipulations.
In rodents and healthy human subjects, disruptions in PPI of startle are produced by: stimulation
of D2 dopamine receptors, with amphetamine or apomorphine; activation of serotonergic systems, produced by direct 5-HT2A receptor agonists, such as LSD or psilocybin; and blockade of
NMDA receptors, produced by drugs such as MK801, ketamine, or PCP. Moreover, deficits in PPI
were also present in mice heterozygous for Nrg1 transmembrane domain (Falls 2003), a proposed
schizophrenia-related phenotype representing a putative animal model of genetic vulnerability
to schizophrenia. All these models of disrupted PPI have been applied to the identification of
potential antipsychotic treatments.
Several studies have been performed in order to investigate the antipsychotic-like potential of
CBD on PPI responses in different animal models of schizophrenia, whereas a CBD effect on PPI
responses in healthy subjects and schizophrenic patients has not been described so far. When
given alone, acute as well as chronic CBD had no effect on the startle response, but produced a
significant increase of PPI in rats (Long et al. 2010). While these findings do not in themselves
represent antipsychotic-like effects, it is interesting to speculate on whether such an improved
baseline in sensorimotor gating, as observed with acute and chronic CBD, might interact with
the effect of genetic or pharmacological challenges on PPI. CBD was able to reverse PPI deficits
induced by MK801, whereas administration of CBD alone had no effect (Long et al. 2006). The
same results were obtained with clozapine, suggesting once more that CBD may exhibit an atypical antipsychotic profile.
However, in a more recent study, CBD treatment alone disrupted PPI and failed to reverse MK801induced disruption of PPI in rats (Gururajan et al. 2011), prompting the authors to suggest that CBD
may exhibit propsychotic activity in this glutamatergic model of psychosis. Finally, Long et al. (2012),
testing the efficacy of CBD at reversing the schizophrenic phenotype present in the Nrg1 HET mice
(locomotor hyperactivity, PPI deficits and reduced 5-HT2A receptor binding density in the substantia nigra), demonstrated that after 21 days of CBD treatment these phenotypes were not reversed.
However, long-term CBD (50 and 100 mg/kg, i.p.) selectively enhanced social interaction in Nrg1
TM HET mice, while acute CBD (100 mg/kg, i.p.) selectively increased PPI in Nrg1 TM HET mice,
although tolerance to this effect was manifest upon repeated CBD administration.

529

530

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

The results of these studies are conflicting and clearly suggest the need to further investigate
the effect of CBD per se on PPI as well as its ability to modulate the deficit of sensorimotor gating
present in animal models of schizophrenia.
28.3.3 Negative symptoms and cognitive deficits

Since currently approved therapeutics only address psychotic symptoms, with minor negative
symptom treatment, the search for drugs able to manage this dimension still represents a priority. In this context, some recent papers point toward a potential positive effect of CBD. In animal
models, a decrease in social interaction has been described as a behavioral parameter that mirrors
the negative symptoms of schizophrenia (Castagné et al. 2009; Sams-Dodd 1999). Using experimental models, researchers demonstrated that CBD was able to reverse social withdrawal, and
this was shown both in rats treated with MK801 (Gururajan et al. 2011, 2012) or in Nrg1 TM HET
mice (Long et al. 2012). However, Almeida et al. (2012) reported that CBD was not able to recover
the social deficit present in Spontaneously Hypertensive Rats (SHR), considered as a good animal
model for studying various aspects of schizophrenia (Calzavara et al. 2009, 2011a, 2011b; Levin
et al. 2011), although it did significantly increase social interaction in healthy Wistar rats. Based
on this observation they suggested that CBD could be considered to be an anxiolytic drug rather
than an antipsychotic one. Thus, we need further studies in other animal models of schizophrenia,
such as the ones based on environmental manipulation or on the neurodevelopmental hypothesis,
to thoroughly ascertain the ability of CBD to recover negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
To date, the ability of CBD to specifically recover the cognitive deficits present in animal models
of schizophrenia has not been investigated. However, data present in the literature point toward
the potential use of CBD for the treatment of cognitive decline associated with neurodegenerative
or neuroinflammatory disorders (Avraham et al. 2011; Cassol-Jr et al. 2010; Fagherazzi et al. 2012;
Magen et al. 2010). Although these experimental manipulations are not considered as animal
models of schizophrenia, this finding might suggest that CBD could be effective also in reverting
the cognitive deficit associated with this psychiatric disease.
Moreover, based on some reports in the literature where synthetic CB1 antagonists were used to
recover cognitive deficits present in environmental or pharmacological animal models of schizophrenia (Black et al. 2011; Guidali et al. 2011; Zamberletti et al. 2012b, 2012c), we can speculate
that pCBs showing a CB1 antagonist profile, such as, for example, THCV (Pertwee 2008), should
be tested to evaluate their potential for reducing the impairment in cognition present in schizophrenia. Accordingly, preliminary data from our laboratory indicate that acute administration of
THCV, and also of CBG, effectively reverted the cognitive deficits and social withdrawal induced
by subchronic PCP treatment in rats (M. Gabaglio and D. Parolaro, personal communication).

28.4 Clinical studies
As already mentioned, many epidemiological studies have revealed an association between cannabis use and acute or chronic psychosis, and these effects are mainly mediated by the major
psychotropic component of cannabis, THC (Bhattacharyya et al. 2009; D’Souza et al. 2005; Moore
et al. 2007). Intriguingly, some studies show that CBD can attenuate the psychotomimetic effects
associated with THC, depending on the measured effect, route of administration, and dose-ratio
between these two cannabinoids. Dalton et al. (1976) reported that a high dose of smoked CBD
slightly inhibited the psychotomimetic effects associated with smoked THC. Another group,
using mismatch negativity as a measure of auditory function, found significantly greater mismatch negativity amplitude values at central electrodes following treatment with combined CBD

Cannabidiol/Phytocannabinoids: A New Opportunity for Schizophrenia Treatment?

and THC compared to THC alone, indicating that CBD may have exerted an antipsychotic effect
(Juckel et al. 2007). Finally, a recent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) trial demonstrated that THC and CBD had opposite effects in terms of the activation of brain areas using different tasks (Bhattacharyya et al. 2010). Moreover, pretreatment with CBD inhibits THC-induced
psychotic episodes in healthy subjects (Bhattacharyya et al. 2010; Englund et al. 2013), suggesting
that CBD can oppose the psychotic effects of THC also in humans. Overall, these results are consistent with the finding that subjects smoking strains of cannabis containing higher CBD amounts
are less prone to develop psychotic symptoms than subjects smoking strains of cannabis without
CBD (Di Forti et al. 2009; Morgan and Curran, 2008; Morgan et al. 2011; Schubart et al. 2011).
It is well known that binocular depth inversion is significantly altered in patients with acute
productive schizophrenic psychosis. Thus the assessment of this paradigm could provide a model
of impaired perception during psychotic states. In this model, impairment of the perception of
the illusory image induced by nabilone was attenuated by CBD, suggesting an antipsychotic-like
effect of this compound (Leweke et al. 2000).
Another important model used to evaluate antipsychotic-like activity in healthy volunteers
is the administration of subanesthetic doses of ketamine. In healthy individuals, CBD has been
proven to be effective in reverting the psychotic symptoms induced by subanesthetic doses of
ketamine as demonstrated by a significant reduction of the total scores and factors of the Clinician
Administered Dissociative States Scale (CADSS) (Bosi et al. 2003). In contrast, more recently,
Hallak et al. (2011) reported that oral CBD increased ketamine-induced activation as measured
by the activation subscales of the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) and failed to reduce
ketamine-induced positive symptoms as assessed by the CADSS.
Based on the lack of toxicity associated with CBD administration in healthy subjects, its potential antipsychotic effect has been investigated also, over the last few years, in some schizophrenic
patients. In 1995, Zuardi et al. reported a significant improvement during CBD treatment in a
case study with a 19-year-old schizophrenic female patient who presented serious side effects after
treatment with conventional antipsychotics. Interestingly, no side effects were observed following
CBD treatment. However, more recently, Zuardi et al. (2006) did not find CBD monotherapy to
be effective relative to placebo in a case series of treatment-resistant schizophrenia patients. These
studies suggest, therefore, that CBD has an antipsychotic-like profile in healthy volunteers, and in
schizophrenic patients that are not resistant to established antipsychotic medicines. Accordingly, a
4-week, randomized controlled trial of CBD versus amisulpride did not reveal any significant differences between the groups, suggesting that the former exerted an antipsychotic effect (Leweke
et al. 2007). These findings were recently replicated in another double-blind, randomized clinical
trial of CBD versus amisulpride in 42 acute schizophrenia patients that revealed no marked difference between the two treatments as measured by the BPRS and Positive and Negative Syndrome
Scale (PANSS) scales (Leweke et al. 2012). Intriguingly, the antipsychotic effect of CBD was even
better than the one induced by amisulpiride when only the negative symptoms were taken into
account (Leweke et al. 2012) and was associated with marked tolerability and safety, when compared with current medications. The beneficial effect of CBD may rely on its ability to increase
serum levels of AEA by inhibiting its enzymatic degradation, for example, by fatty acid amide
hydrolase (FAAH) (Leweke et al. 2012), suggesting that inhibition of AEA deactivation may
potentially represent a new therapeutic strategy for the treatment of schizophrenia.
Interestingly, CBD has also been demonstrated to be effective in the treatment of psychotic symptoms associated with Parkinson’s disease. Moreover, besides reducing psychosis, CBD
administration to those patients also alleviated motor symptoms, suggesting its possible exploitation in the treatment of this psychiatric condition (Zuardi et al. 2009).

531

532

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

It is more difficult to comment on the possible exploitation of pCBs to ameliorate cognitive
symptoms of schizophrenia, due to the lack of literature on this. Only one paper has appeared
on this issue and it addressed the effect of CBD on the cognitive performance of schizophrenic
patients (Hallak et al. 2010). The authors specifically monitored selective attention through the
Stroop Color Word Test and found no evidence of improvement after a single dose of CBD.
However, they claimed the possibility that chronic use may lead to cognitive improvement as has
been observed with clozapine.

28.5 Conclusions
As a whole, data published so far seem to suggest that pCBs, and more specifically CBD, may exert
beneficial effects on the positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Regarding its pharmacological properties, CBD seems to possess a profile similar to that of atypical antipsychotics, but
its administration is associated with lower side effects. Accordingly, when its effect on neuronal
activation was investigated, CBD was demonstrated to induce c-fos immunoreactivity in the
prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens (Guimarães et al., 2004; Murillo-Rodriguez et al. 2006)
in a manner similar to clozapine (Robertson and Fibiger 1992), further supporting a pharmacological profile resembling that of atypical antipsychotics. The lack of c-fos induction in the dorsal
striatum, which is associated with extrapyramidal side effects induced by typical antipsychotics
(Campos et al. 2012), may explain the reduced side effects associated with its administration.
The precise mechanism of action responsible for the antipsychotic effect of CBD is still
unknown. However, CBD has been reported to increase serum levels of AEA by inhibiting the
enzymatic degradation of this endocannabinoid, and this effect was associated with decreased
psychotic symptoms in patients (Leweke et al. 2012), in line with the “anandamidergic hypothesis”

Less side
effects

No c-fos
induction in
dorsal striatum
Reduced
psychotic
symptoms

FAAH
inhibition

5-HT1A
activation

Improvement
of cognitive
and negative
symptoms?

CBD

CB1
antagonism

Reduced
psychotic
symptoms

Fig. 28.1 Putative pharmacological actions underlying antipsychotic effects of CBD.

Cannabidiol/Phytocannabinoids: A New Opportunity for Schizophrenia Treatment?

Box 28.1 Take-home messages
◆

CBD might exert an antipsychotic effect in animal models of schizophrenia.

◆

CBD might ameliorate psychotic symptoms in schizophrenic patients.

◆

◆

◆

CBD might exhibit a pharmacological profile similar to that of atypical antipsychotics, with
lower side effects.
CBD’s likely antipsychotic efficacy could depend on its ability to act on multiple cellular
targets (see Fig. 28.1).
There is an urgent need to explore more fully whether/how CBD alleviates positive and
negative symptoms of schizophrenia.

of schizophrenia. Moreover, the reported ability of CBD to activate 5-HT1A receptors (Russo et al.
2005) prompts further research directed at assessing its efficacy in reverting the cognitive deficits
of schizophrenia, as already demonstrated for the newest atypical antipsychotics (Sumiyoshi and
Higuchi 2013). Finally, the ability of CBD to block CB1 receptor signaling (Thomas et al. 2007)
may also participate in its antipsychotic action (Roser et al. 2010). Thus, CBD can be considered
as a “multitarget” drug (Fig. 28.1) whose therapeutic potential appears to be particularly interesting for the treatment of the puzzling and multifaceted disease of schizophrenia.
However, although promising, data on the antipsychotic effect of CBD are still preliminary
and further investigations are needed in order to thoroughly assess its therapeutic potential for
the treatment of this disorder (Box 28.1). In addition, besides CBD, other pCBs seem to possess
interesting pharmacological actions that prompt us to suggest their possible exploitation for the
treatment of psychosis.

References
Abi-Dargham, A. and Guillin, O. (2007). Integrating the neurobiology of schizophrenia. International
Review of Neurobiology, 78, xiii–xvi.
Almeida, V., Levin, R., Peres, F.F., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol exhibits anxiolytic but not antipsychotic
property evaluated in the social interaction test. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological
Psychiatry, 41C, 30–35.
Avraham, Y., Grigoriadis, N., Poutahidis, T., et al. (2011). Cannabidiol improves brain and liver function in a fulminant hepatic failure-induced model of hepatic encephalopathy in mice. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 162, 1650–1658.
Bhattacharyya, S., Fusar-Poli, P., Borgwardt, S., et al. (2009). Modulation of mediotemporal and ventrostriatal function in humans by Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol: a neural basis for the effects of Cannabis
sativa on learning and psychosis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66, 442–451.
Bhattacharyya, S., Morrison, P.D., Fusar-Poli, P., et al. (2010). Opposite effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
and cannabidiol on human brain function and psychopathology. Neuropsychopharmacology, 35, 764–774.
Black, M.D., Stevens, R.J., Rogacki, N., et al. (2011). AVE1625, a cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist, as
a co-treatment with antipsychotics for schizophrenia: improvement in cognitive function and reduction
of antipsychotic-side effects in rodents. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 215, 149–163.
Bosi, D.C., Hallak, J.E.C., Dursun, S.M., Deakin, J.F.W., and Zuardi, A.W. (2003). Effects of cannabidiol on (s)-ketamine-induced psychopathology in healthy volunteers. Journal of Psychopharmacology,
17, A55.

533

534

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Braff, D.L., Swerdlow, N.R., and Geyer, M.A. (1999). Symptom correlates of prepulse inhibition deficits in
male schizophrenic patients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 596–602.
Broome, M.R., Woolley, J.B., Tabraham, P., et al. (2005). What causes the onset of psychosis?
Schizophrenia Research, 79, 23–34.
Bubeníková-Valesová, V., Horácek, J., Vrajová, M., and Höschl, C. (2008). Models of schizophrenia in
humans and animals based on inhibition of NMDA receptors. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
32, 1014–1023.
Calzavara, M.B., Levin, R., Medrano, W.A., et al. (2011a). Effects of antipsychotics and amphetamine on
social behaviors in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Behavioural Brain Research, 225, 15–22.
Calzavara, M.B., Medrano, W.A., Levin, R., et al. (2009). Neuroleptic drugs revert the contextual fear conditioning deficit presented by spontaneously hypertensive rats: a potential animal model of emotional
context processing in schizophrenia? Schizophrenia Bulletin 35, 748–759.
Calzavara, M.B., Medrano, W.A., Levin. R., Libânio, T.C., de Alencar Ribeiro, R., and Abílio, V.C.
(2011b). The contextual fear conditioning deficit presented by spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) is
not improved by mood stabilizers. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 35,
1607–1611.
Campos, A.C., Moreira, F.A., Gomes, F.V., Del Bel, E.A., and Guimarães, F.S. (2012). Multiple mechanisms involved in the large-spectrum therapeutic potential of cannabidiol in psychiatric disorders.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. Series B, Biological Sciences, 367, 3364–3378.
Cassol-Jr, O.J., Comim, C.M., Silva, B.R., et al. (2010). Treatment with cannabidiol reverses oxidative
stress parameters, cognitive impairment and mortality in rats submitted to sepsis by cecal ligation and
puncture. Brain Research, 1348, 128–138.
Castagné, V., Moser, P.C., and Porsolt, R.D. (2009). Preclinical behavioral models for predicting antipsychotic activity. Advances in Pharmacology, 57, 381–418.
D’Souza, D.C., Abi-Saab, W.M., Madonick, S., et al. (2005). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol effects in schizophrenia: implications for cognition, psychosis, and addiction. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 594–608.
Dalton, W.S., Martz, R., Lemberger, L., Rodda, B.E., and Forney, R.B. (1976). Influence of cannabidiol on
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol effects. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 19, 300–309.
Di Forti, M., Morgan, C., Dazzan, P., et al. (2009). High-potency cannabis and the risk of psychosis. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 195, 488–491.
Dixon, L., Haas, G., Wedien, P.J., Sweeney, J., and Frances, A.J. (1990). Acute effects of drug abuse in
schizophrenic patients: clinical observations and patients’ self-reports. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 16, 69–79.
Ellenbroek, B.A. and Riva, M.A. (2003). Early maternal deprivation as an animal model for schizophrenia.
Clinical Neuroscience Research, 3, 297–302.
Englund, A., Morrison, P.D. and Nottage, J., et al. (2013). Cannabidiol inhibits THC-elicited paranoid
symptoms and hippocampal-dependent memory impairment. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 27, 19–27.
Fagherazzi, E.V., Garcia, V.A., Maurmann, N., et al. (2012). Memory-rescuing effects of cannabidiol in
an animal model of cognitive impairment relevant to neurodegenerative disorders. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin), 219, 1133–1140.
Falls, D.L. (2003). Neuregulins: functions, forms, and signaling strategies. Experimental Cell Research, 284,
14–30.
Ferdinand, R.F., Sondeijker, F., van der Ende, J., Selten, J.P., Huizink, A., and Verhulst, F.C. (2005).
Cannabis use predicts future psychotic symptoms, and vice versa. Addiction, 100, 612–618.
Fone, K.C. and Porkess, M.V. (2008). Behavioural and neurochemical effects of post-weaning social isolation in rodents-relevance to developmental neuropsychiatric disorders. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 32, 1087–1102.
Guidali, C., Viganò, D., Petrosino S., et al. (2011). Cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonism prevents
neurochemical and behavioural deficits induced by chronic phencyclidine. International Journal of
Neuropsychopharmacol, 14, 17–28.

Cannabidiol/Phytocannabinoids: A New Opportunity for Schizophrenia Treatment?

Guimarães, V.M., Zuardi, A.W., Del Bel, E.A., and Guimarães, F.S. (2004). Cannabidiol increases Fos
expression in the nucleus accumbens but not in the dorsal striatum. Life Sciences, 75, 633–638.
Gururajan, A., Taylor, D.A., and Malone, D.T. (2011). Effect of cannabidiol in a MK-801-rodent model of
aspects of schizophrenia. Behavioural Brain Research, 222, 299–308.
Gururajan, A., Taylor, D.A., and Malone, D.T. (2012). Cannabidiol and clozapine reverse MK-801induced deficits in social interaction and hyperactivity in Sprague-Dawley rats. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 26, 1317–1332.
Hallak, J.E., Dursun, S.M., Bosi, D.C., et al. (2011). The interplay of cannabinoid and NMDA glutamate
receptor systems in humans: preliminary evidence of interactive effects of cannabidiol and ketamine in healthy human subjects. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 35,
198–202.
Hallak, J.E., Machado-de-Sousa, J.P., Crippa, J.A., et al. (2010). Performance of schizophrenic patients in
the Stroop Color Word Test and electrodermal responsiveness after acute administration of cannabidiol
(CBD). Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria, 32, 56–61.
Henquet, C., Krabbendam, L., Spauwen, J., et al. (2005). Prospective cohort study of cannabis use, predisposition for psychosis, and psychotic symptoms in young people. British Medical Journal, 330, 11.
Juckel, G., Roser, P., Nadulski, T., Stadelmann, A.M., and Gallinat, J. (2007). Acute effects of Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol and standardized cannabis extract on the auditory evoked mismatch negativity.
Schizophrenia Research, 97, 109–117.
Krystal, J.H., D’Souza, D.C., Madonick, S., and Petrakis, I.L. (1999). Toward a rational pharmacotherapy
of comorbid substance abuse in schizophrenic patients. Schizophrenia Research, 35(Suppl), S35–S49.
Kuepper, R., van Os, J., Lieb, R., Wittchen, H.U., Höfler, M., and Henquet, C. (2011). Continued cannabis
use and risk of incidence and persistence of psychotic symptoms: 10 year follow-up cohort study. British
Medical Journal, 342, d738.
Levin, R., Calzavara, M.B., Santos, C.M., Medrano, W.A., Niigaki, S.T., and Abílio, V.C. (2011).
Spontaneously Hypertensive Rats (SHR) present deficits in prepulse inhibition of startle specifically
reverted by clozapine. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 35, 1748–1752.
Leweke, F., Koethe, D., and Gerth, C.W. (2007). Double blind, controlled clinical trial of cannabidiol monotherapy versus amisulpiride in the treatment of acutely psychotic schizophrenia patients. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 33, 310.
Leweke, F.M., Piomelli, D., Pahlisch, F., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol enhances anandamide signaling and
alleviates psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. Translational Psychiatry, 2, e94.
Leweke, F.M., Schneider, U., Radwan, M., Schmidt, E., and Emrich, H.M. (2000). Different effects
of nabilone and cannabidiol on binocular depth inversion in Man. Pharmacology Biochemistry and
Behavior, 66, 175–181.
Llorente-Berzal, A., Fuentes, S., Gagliano, H., et al. (2011). Sex-dependent effects of maternal deprivation
and adolescent cannabinoid treatment on adult rat behaviour. Addiction Biology, 16, 624–637.
Long, L.E., Chesworth, R., Huang, X.F., et al. (2012). Distinct neurobehavioural effects of cannabidiol in
transmembrane domain neuregulin 1 mutant mice. PLoS One, 7, e34129.
Long, L.E., Chesworth, R., Huang, X.F., McGregor, I.S., Arnold, J.C., and Karl, T. (2010). A behavioural
comparison of acute and chronic Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol in C57BL/6JArc mice.
International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 13, 861–876.
Long, L.E., Malone, D.T., and Taylor, D.A. (2006). Cannabidiol reverses MK-801-induced disruption of
prepulse inhibition in mice. Neuropsychopharmacology, 31, 795–803.
Ludewig, K., Geyer, M.A., and Vollenweider, F.X. (2003). Deficits in prepulse inhibition and habituation
in never-medicated, first-episode schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry, 54,121–128.
Magen, I., Avraham, Y., Ackerman, Z., Vorobiev, L., Mechoulam, R., and Berry, E.M. (2010).
Cannabidiol ameliorates cognitive and motor impairments in bile-duct ligated mice via 5-HT1A receptor activation. British Journal of Pharmacology, 159, 950–957.

535

536

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Moore, T.H., Zammit, S., Lingford-Hughes, A., et al. (2007). Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or affective mental health outcomes: a systematic review. Lancet, 370, 319–328.
Moreira, F.A. and Guimarães, F.S. (2005). Cannabidiol inhibits the hyperlocomotion induced by psychotomimetic drugs in mice. European Journal of Pharmacology, 512, 199–205.
Morgan, C.J. and Curran, H.V. (2008). Effects of cannabidiol on schizophrenia-like symptoms in people
who use cannabis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 306–307.
Morgan, C.J., Gardener, C., Schafer, G., et al. (2011). Sub-chronic impact of cannabinoids in street cannabis on cognition, psychotic-like symptoms and psychological well-being. Psychological Medicine, 29,
1–10.
Murillo-Rodríguez, E., Millán-Aldaco, D., Palomero-Rivero, M., Mechoulam, R., and Drucker-Colín,
R. (2006). Cannabidiol, a constituent of Cannabis sativa, modulates sleep in rats. FEBS Letters, 580,
4337–4345.
Pertwee, R.G. (2008). The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology of three plant cannabinoids:
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabivarin. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 153, 199–215.
Powell, S.B., Zhou, X., and Geyer, M.A. (2009). Prepulse inhibition and genetic mouse models of schizophrenia. Behavioural Brain Research, 204, 282–294.
Robertson, G.S. and Fibiger, H.C. (1992). Neuroleptics increase c-fos expression in the forebrain: contrasting effects of haloperidol and clozapine. Neuroscience, 46, 315–328.
Rock, E.M., Goodwin, J.M., Limebeer, C.L., et al. (2011). Interaction between non-psychotropic cannabinoids in marihuana: effect of cannabigerol (CBG) on the anti-nausea or anti-emetic effects of cannabidiol (CBD) in rats and shrews. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 215, 505–512.
Roser, P., Vollenweider, F.X., and Kawohl, W. (2010). Potential antipsychotic properties of central cannabinoid (CB1) receptor antagonists. World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 11, 208–219.
Russo, E.B., Burnett, A., Hall, B., and Parker, K.K. (2005). Agonistic properties of cannabidiol at 5-HT1a
receptors. Neurochemical Research, 30, 1037–1043.
Sams-Dodd, F. (1999). Phencyclidine in the social interaction test: an animal model of schizophrenia with
face and predictive validity. Reviews in the Neurosciences, 10, 59–90.
Schneier, F.R. and Siris, S.G. (1987). A review of psychoactive substance use and abuse in schizophrenia:
patterns of drug choice. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disorders, 175, 641–652.
Schubart, C.D., Sommer, I.E., van Gastel, W.A., Goetgebuer, R.L., Kahn, R.S., and Boks, M.P. (2011).
Cannabis with high cannabidiol content is associated with fewer psychotic experiences. Schizophrenia
Research, 130, 216–221.
Sumiyoshi, T. and Higuchi, Y. (2013). Facilitative effect of serotonin1A receptor agonists on cognition in
patients with schizophrenia. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 20, 357–362.
Thomas, A., Baillie, G.L., Phillips, A.M., Razdan, R.K., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2007). Cannabidiol
displays unexpectedly high potency as an antagonist of CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists in vitro. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 613–623.
Zamberletti, E., Rubino, T., and Parolaro, D. (2012a). The endocannabinoid system and schizophrenia:
integration of evidence. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 18, 4980–4990.
Zamberletti, E., Piscitelli, F., Cadeddu, F., et al. (2012b). Chronic blockade of CB(1) receptors reverses
startle gating deficits and associated neurochemical alterations in rats reared in isolation. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 167, 1652–1664.
Zamberletti, E., Viganò, D., Guidali, C., Rubino, T., and Parolaro, D. (2012c). Long-lasting recovery of
psychotic-like symptoms in isolation-reared rats after chronic but not acute treatment with the cannabinoid antagonist AM251. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 15, 267–280.
Zuardi, A.W., Crippa, J.A., Hallak, J.E., et al. (2009). Cannabidiol for the treatment of psychosis in
Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 23, 979–983.

Cannabidiol/Phytocannabinoids: A New Opportunity for Schizophrenia Treatment?

Zuardi, A.W., Hallak, J.E., Dursun, S.M., et al. (2006). Cannabidiol monotherapy for treatment-resistant
schizophrenia. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 20, 683–686.
Zuardi, A.W., Morais, S.L., Guimarães, F.S., and Mechoulam, R. (1995). Anti-psychotic effect of cannabidiol. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 56, 485–486.
Zuardi, A.W., Rodrigues, J.A., and Cunha, J.M. (1991). Effects of cannabidiol in animal models predictive
of antipsychotic activity. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 104, 260–264.

537

Chapter 29

Phytocannabinoids as Novel
Therapeutic Agents for Sleep Disorders
Eric Murillo-Rodríguez, Lisa Aguilar-Turton, Stephanie
Mijangos-Moreno, Andrea Sarro-Ramírez,
and Óscar Arias-Carrión

29.1 Introduction
Sleep may be defined using behavioral, physiological, neurochemical, and molecular criteria. For
instance, behaviorally, sleep consists of a lack of mobility and an elevated arousal threshold to
external stimulation. Moreover, following the rules set out by Rechtschaffen and Kales in 1968,
and using physiological measurements such as electroencephalography (EEG), electrooculography (EOG), and electromyography (EMG; Fig. 29.1), the wake–sleep cycle consists of periodic
alternation of three major behavioral states: waking (W), slow-wave sleep (SWS), and rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep (for a comprehensive review, see Jafari and Mohsenin 2010).
Currently it is accepted that in healthy humans, EEG activity is characterized by low voltage
(10–30 microvolts) as well as fast activity (16–25 Hz) whereas high amplitude is observed in
EMG recordings from postural muscles. Transitions from W to sleep stages display specific polysomnographic features. For instance, during the wakefulness–sleep transition, EEG recordings
show a progressive slowing of dominant frequency as well as higher-voltage activity. Once SWS is
established, four stages are observed in the EEG charts: SWS1–4. The first phase of SWS (SWS1)
is for approximately 5 min during the wakefulness–sleep transition. SWS1 displays EEG with
low voltage and mixed-frequency activity whereas EOG shows slow rolling eye movements. The
next sleep stage, SWS2, is characterized by bursts of sleep spindle sinusoidal waves (12–14 Hz)
and high-voltage biphasic waves known as “K complexes.” Subsequently, SWS3 displays a highamplitude signal and slow waves (0.5–2 Hz; known as delta waves) in the EEG charts. In normal
conditions (no health problems), the three phases of SWS (SWS1–3) take up 75–80% of the total
sleep time. The final phase of SWS (SWS4) includes slow-wave activity and dominates the EEG
recording. Under normal conditions, after SWS4, the EEG recordings register the appearance
of REM sleep, a phase that was first described more than 50 years ago (Aserinsky and Kleitman
1953; Dement 1958; Jouvet and Michel 1959). REM sleep in humans as well as other mammals is
characterized by the appearance of fast, desynchronized brain activity, rapid eye movements, and
a loss of muscle tone. Since EEG activity during REM sleep closely resembles that of the alertness
state, REM sleep is also known as “paradoxical sleep” or “active sleep.”
Day after day, under normal conditions, the sleep–wake cycle in humans transits from SWS1
to SWS4 and then to periods of REM sleeps (Fig. 29.1). This progression is repeated cyclically
throughout the sleep cycle at intervals of 90–100 min (Murillo-Rodríguez et al. 2009; Patil 2010).
Although we have previously stated that SWS has four stages, the American Academy of Sleep
Medicine (2007) further divides SWS into three stages: SWS1–3.

Phytocannabinoids as Novel Therapeutic Agents for Sleep Disorders

Circadian rhythms

Day

Night

6

12

18

24

Day time

Rest

Activity
Wake

Phase 1

2

3

4

REM

EEG
EOG
EOG
EMG
1s

50 μV

Fig. 29.1 The sleep–wake cycle in humans is characterized by different stages. In this figure, we can
notice that during waking there is a low voltage activity seen in the electroencephalogram (EEG).
The transition from waking to Stage 1 presents on the EEG a slower activity. Stage 2 is characterized by the presence of K complexes and sleep spindles. During Stage 3, delta waves are present in
the EEG and they are present more than 50% of the time in Stage 4. During REM sleep, the EEG
pattern presents once again low-voltage and phasic activity that resembles waking. The activity in
the electromyogram (EMG) is higher during wakefulness and decreases across the sleep stages until
virtually absent during REM sleep. EEG, electroencephalogram; EOG, electrooculogram; EMG, electromyogram; REM, rapid eye movement sleep.

The regulation of sleep involves the activity of several brain nuclei, as well as the interaction of
diverse neurotransmitters (Murillo-Rodríguez et al. 2009). Different theories have been developed to explain the neurobiology of sleep. For instance, McCarley and Hobson (1975) suggested
the “reciprocal interaction” model of switching circuitry regulating REM sleep generation. Briefly,
this model, which is supported by a number of recent findings, proposes that neurons from brainstem nuclei, such as locus coeruleus (noradrenergic), dorsal raphe (serotoninergic), and pontine
reticular formation (glutamatergic) are active during alertness, and that their electrophysiological
activity becomes silent during SWS, and absent during REM sleep. This has prompted neurons
in the locus coeruleus, dorsal raphe, and pontine reticular formation to be referred to as “REMOFF neurons.” Additional evidence, however, supports the idea that sleep is generated as a result
of the inhibition of “REM-OFF neurons” by a cluster of neurons located in the laterodorsal and
pedunculopontine tegmental nuclei (PPN; cholinergic) which exhibit activity exclusively during
REM sleep. Neurons from PPN nuclei have been called “REM-ON neurons” (Mallick et al. 2012;
Monti 2011).
While the sleep–wake cycle could be defined by polysomnographic and electrophysiological
parameters, it is also possible to describe it by using neurochemical criteria. In this regard, W
is generated by neurotransmitters, e.g., glutamate, norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, hypocretin, acetylcholine, and histamine. Neurons that release one or other of these transmitters are
present in the brainstem and basal forebrain which act through the cerebral cortex to generate and
maintain alertness (Murillo-Rodríguez et al. 2012). Other endogenous molecules have a key role

539

540

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

in sleep, e.g., gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), peptides, cytokines and lipid sleep-inducing
factors (Murillo-Rodríguez et al. 2012).

29.2 Sleep disorders
Sleep disturbances, that display a range of different EEG/EMG polysomnographic features,
have been described, classified, and defined as sleep disorders. According to the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD; American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2001), they are
classified into four categories:
1 Dyssomnias: problems initiating and maintaining sleep, and also excessive sleepiness.
2 Parasomnias: disorders of arousal, partial arousal, or sleep stage transition.
3 Sleep disorders associated with mental, neurologic, or other medical disorders.
4 Other sleep disorders: sleep disorders not included in categories 1, 2, or 3.
The ICSD was produced primarily for diagnostic and epidemiologic purposes and it provides
useful and critical information. For example, to analyze sleep habits, a total of 1000 telephone
interviews were conducted among a random sample of Americans between September and
November 2007. Respondents had to be at least 18 years of age and working 30 h per week or
more for pay. The results were included in the National Sleep Foundation Poll 2008 (US) and
showed that 42% of those surveyed reported they were awake during the night, whereas 36%
reported that they had fallen asleep while driving. These striking data suggest a presence of sleep
disturbances and indicate the importance of exploring new therapeutic approaches to managing
insomnia and sleepiness. In the following section, based on experimental evidence, we will review
potential therapeutic approaches, including the use of cannabinoids, to treat and manage some
sleep disorders.

29.3 Insomnia and somnolence
The ICSD defines insomnia as a dyssomnia characterized by a night complaint of an insufficient
amount of sleep or not feeling rested after the habitual sleep episode. Insomnia is often associated with feelings of restlessness, irritability, anxiety, daytime fatigue, and tiredness (Pigeon and
Cribbet 2012).
In contrast, somnolence is defined as sleep episodes that are present during the W stage that
require mild to moderate attention. Somnolence might occur as a secondary health condition, For
example, side effects of medication, illicit substance use, or obstructive sleep apnea (Pagel 2009).
29.3.1 Rational therapeutic approaches to treat insomnia

and somnolence

Treatments of insomnia that are currently available include both cognitive behavioral therapy
and drug therapy (Mitchell et al. 2012). In this regard, it has been suggested that benzodiazepinereceptor agonists and nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic agents (like zolpidem) are effective in the
short-term management of insomnia. However, side effects (dependence and tolerance) have
been reported when using these drugs (Bastien 2011; Morin and Benca 2012; Riemann and
Perlis 2009).
Whereas insomnia is managed by using behavioral and/or pharmacological therapies, somnolence is treated by applying noninvasive continuous positive airway pressure (Marin et al. 2012;
Sharma et al. 2011), or with drugs such as modafinil (commercially known as Provigil™) which is

Phytocannabinoids as Novel Therapeutic Agents for Sleep Disorders

the first-line drug for the treatment of excessive daytime sleepiness (Darwish et al. 2011; Tembe
et al. 2011). Given that somnolence could be the result of associated sleep disorders, such as sleep
apnea, a differential diagnostic procedure should be used to seek out a pathognomonic sign or
symptom, i.e., one that is specifically associated with a particular type of somnolence.
Promoting the use of effective treatments for insomnia or somnolence will alleviate greatly
the personal burden imposed by sleep disorders. For example, the most important sleep hygiene
measure is to maintain a regular sleep and wake pattern 7 days a week. However, different and
novel approaches are needed to treat sleep disorders in the near future. In the next section, we
present some evidence that cannabinoids have therapeutic potential for the treatment of insomnia
and somnolence.

29.4 Phytocannabinoids and sleep
Marijuana is a common name given to the plant Cannabis sativa (C. sativa). This plant has been used
by diverse cultures for distinct purposes, such as for mystical ceremonies, social interaction, as well
as for therapeutic aims (Ameri 1999; Grant et al. 2012; Hollister 1986; Robson 2001; Zias et al. 1993).
Despite legal restriction, cannabinoids are often used for medical treatment in several countries,
e.g., Canada and the UK. Moreover, changes to civil law in the US that led to the Compassionate
Use Act of 1996 (also known as Prop. 215) and the Medical Marijuana Program (also called
SB 420), have facilitated the use of marijuana as a potential therapeutic option in sleep medicine
(Reinarman et al. 2011; Swartz 2010).
The use of C. sativa for medical purposes is supported by experimental evidence showing that
it controls and improves symptoms of several disorders, including multiple sclerosis (associated
with muscle spasticity, pain, and sleep disorders), psychosis, bipolar disorder, anxiety, chronic
pain, anorexia, and cancer (Arias Horcajadas 2007; Borgelt et al. 2013; Burns and Ineck 2006;
Crippa et al. 2012; de Jong et al. 2005; Grant et al. 2012; Hollister, 1986; Kalant 2001; O’Sullivan
et al. 2005; Robson 2001; Sarne and Mechoulam 2005; Swartz 2010).
If C. sativa can ameliorate sleep disorders then the question arises as to what molecule(s) from
this plant would be most effective at treating these disorders? It has been demonstrated that C.
sativa contains over 70 different chemical compounds (phytocannabinoids). Two of the most
well-known examples are: delta-9- tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ 9-THC) and cannabidiol (CBD)
(Gaoni and Mechoulam 1964; Mechoulam and Hanus 2002; Mechoulam et al. 2007) (Fig. 29.2).
Since their discovery, the pharmacology and therapeutic potential of both these phytocannabinoids has been extensively investigated.
29.4.1 Δ9-THC and sleep

It has been demonstrated that Δ9-THC has sleep-inducing effects (Freemon 1982; Pivik et al.
1972). Daily doses of 70–210 mg of this cannabinoid induced sleep in humans (Feinberg et al.
1975, 1976) whereas in animals, the administration of Δ9-THC (1 mg/kg) reduced the voltage of
cortical activity during alertness. Moreover, the waking-associated power spectra were diminished by the administration of Δ9-THC (Buonamici et al. 1982). Although the pharmacological
effect of this cannabinoid on sleep was explored in the 1970s and 1980s, interest in this effect
remains (Russo et al. 2007).
29.4.2 CBD and sleep

Effects of CBD on sleep are somewhat contradictory. For example, Monti (1977) reported a reduction of sleep by systemic administration of CBD whereas Carlini and Cunha (1981) reported a

541

542

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Exogenous cannabinoids

Molecular structure

OH
H
H

Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol

Effects on sleep

Waking

SWS

REMS

Waking

SWS

REMS

Waking

SWS

REMS

?

?

?

O

H

H

OH

Cannabidiol

O
H
O
(R) H
H (R)
O

OH

Nabilone

Fig. 29.2 Pharmacological effects of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and nabilone on the
sleep-wake cycle. REMS, rapid eye movement sleep; SWS, slow-wave sleep.

CBD-induced improvement in sleep in insomniac patients. These differences can be explained in
part by differences between the methods used in these studies.
Recent data suggest that CBD might be a wake-promoting factor. For example, Nicholson et al.
(2004) reported that administration of this cannabinoid increased alertness in humans, whereas
our group has demonstrated that intracerebroventricular administration of CBD (10 micrograms/5 microliters) to rats at the beginning of the lights-on period increased W and decreased
REM sleep. Furthermore, we have found that CBD enhanced the extracellular levels of dopamine
collected from nucleus accumbens and induced an enhancement of c-Fos expression in wakingrelated brain areas, including hypothalamus and dorsal raphe nucleus (Murillo-Rodríguez et al.
2006). Similar results were obtained by injecting CBD into the lateral hypothalamus during the
lights-on period at doses of 10 or 20 micrograms/1 microliter (Murillo-Rodríguez et al. 2008,
2011). Recently, Hsiao et al. (2012) showed that CBD efficiently blocked anxiety-induced REM
sleep suppression. Taken together, these data suggest that CBD promotes alertness; however the
mechanisms of action of this cannabinoid for its effect on sleep remain unclear.

29.5 Synthetic cannabinoids and sleep
Some reports have pointed out that synthetic Δ9-THC (marinol, dronabinol), which is used
clinically to suppress chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and to increase appetite in
patients with AIDS, can modulate sleep. Haney et al. (2007) have shown that HIV-positive marijuana smokers displayed signs of improved sleep when they received dronabinol (5 and 10 mg)

Phytocannabinoids as Novel Therapeutic Agents for Sleep Disorders

four times daily over 4 days. There is also evidence that the synthetic cannabinoid, nabilone,
which can also reduce chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (Grotenhermen and MüllerVahl 2012; Ware and St Arnaud-Trempe 2010), and shares the ability of Δ9-THC to activate
type 1 and 2 cannabinoid receptors (CB1 and CB2), can modulate sleep. It has been reported by
Fraser (2009) that patients diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder displayed a significant
improvement in sleep time and quality of sleep when treated with nabilone. Furthermore, Ware
et al. (2010) showed that patients with fibromyalgia, a disease characterized by chronic pain and
insomnia, who were treated with nabilone (0.5–1.0 mg before bedtime) showed a significant
improvement in sleep. Despite the therapeutically-positive effects on sleep induced by dronabinol and nabilone, the mechanism of action of these drugs that underlies these effects remains
unknown. No solid evidence is available regarding the manner in which nabilone affects sleep,
prompting a need for further sleep research with this and other cannabinoid receptor agonists.

29.6 Potential uses of phytocannabinoids for sleep disorders
Both Δ9-THC and CBD modulate the sleep–wake cycle by promoting sleep and alertness, respectively (Buonamici et al. 1982; Feinberg et al. 1975, 1976; Freemon 1982; Monti 1977; MurilloRodríguez et al. 2006, 2008, 2011; Nicholson et al. 2004; Pivik et al. 1972). Although further
investigation is needed, Δ9-THC or CBD could be of use for the prevention and management of
sleep disorders in the near future. Although the effects of synthetic cannabinoids on sleep have so
far been poorly described, they should be investigated as potential therapeutic options for treating
sleep disorders.

29.7 Conclusions and future research directions
Modulation of the sleep–waking cycle involves the interaction of multiple neurological and neurochemical substrates (Arias-Carrión et al. 2011; Murillo-Rodríguez et al. 2009, 2012). Several
endogenous and exogenous molecules, including cannabinoids, have been suggested as sleepmodulators (Buonamici et al. 1982; Carlini and Cunha 1981; Feinberg et al. 1975, 1976; Freemon
1982; Monti 1977; Murillo-Rodríguez et al. 2006, 2008, 2011; Nicholson et al. 2004; Pivik et al.
1972). There is also evidence that phytocannabinoids (Δ9-THC and CBD) impair sleep stages,
although no information about the way(s) in which nabilone improves sleep (Fig. 29.2).
Here, we have described the effects on sleep induced by two phytocannabinoids, Δ9-THC and
CBD. From these effects, it can be hypothesized that they have therapeutic potential for treating
insomnia or somnolence. However, further research is imperative if the mechanisms by which
Δ9-THC and CBD modulate sleep and the way(s) in which sleep is affected by other cannabinoids
are to be fully elucidated.
New treatments for sleep disorders might also reduce the risks that confront some transportation professionals. Recently, the National Sleep Foundation’s (NSF) 2012 Sleep in America® poll
reported that that pilots and train operators are most likely to report sleep-related job performance and safety problems. About 23% of pilots admitted in the poll that sleepiness had affected
their job performance at least once a week, compared to nontransportation workers (17%).
Curiously, a significant number of transportation professionals had reported that sleepiness had
caused safety problems on the job. For example, pilots (20%) admitted that they had made a serious error. These results suggest that sleepiness has an important role in transportation accidents.
This report prompts the need to explore novel rational approaches to manage and treat sleep
disorders, such as insomnia or somnolence.

543

544

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Finally, we must remember that however exciting their neurobiological mechanisms might be,
the clinical usefulness of phytocannabinoids will be determined by their ability to provide patients
with sleep disorders with safe, long-lasting, and substantial improvements in quality of life.

References
Ameri, A. (1999). The effects of cannabinoids on the brain. Progress in Neurobiology, 58, 315–348.
American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2001). The International Classification of Sleep Disorders, Revised.
Diagnostic and Coding Manual. Westchester, IL: American Academy of Sleep Medicine.
American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2007). The AASM Manual 2007 for the Scoring of Sleep and
Associated Events. Rules, Terminology and Technical Specifications. Westchester, IL: American Academy
of Sleep Medicine.
Arias-Carrión, O., Huitrón-Reséndiz, S., Arankowsky-Sandoval, G., and Murillo-Rodríguez, E. (2011).
Biochemical modulation of the sleep-wake cycle: endogenous sleep-inducing factors. Journal of
Neuroscience Research, 89, 1143–1149.
Arias Horcajadas, F. (2007). Cannabinoids in eating disorders and obesity. Molecular Neurobiology, 36,
113–128.
Aserinsky, E. and Kleitman, N. (1953). Regularly occurring periods of eye motility, and concomitant phenomena, during sleep. Science, 118, 273–274.
Bastien, C.H. (2011). Insomnia: neurophysiological and neuropsychological approaches. Neuropsychology
Review, 1, 22–40.
Borgelt, L.M., Franson, K.L., Nussbaum, A.M., and Wang, G.S. (2013). The pharmacologic and clinical
effects of medical cannabis. Pharmacotherapy, 33, 195–209.
Buonamici, M., Young, G.A., and Khazan, N. (1982). Effects of acute delta 9-THC administration on EEG
and EEG power spectra in the rat. Neuropharmacology, 21, 825–829.
Burns, T.L. and Ineck, J.R. (2006). Cannabinoid analgesia as a potential new therapeutic option in the
treatment of chronic pain. The Annals of Pharmacotherapy, 40, 251–260.
Carlini, E.A. and Cunha, J.M. (1981). Hypnotic and antiepileptic effects of cannabidiol. The Journal of
Clinical Pharmacology, 21(Suppl. 8–9), 417S–427S.
Crippa, J.A., Derenusson, G.N., and Chagas, M.H. (2012). Pharmacological interventions in the treatment
of the acute effects of cannabis: a systematic review of literature. Harm Reduction Journal, 9, 7.
Darwish, M., Bond, M., and Ezzet, F. (2011). Armodafinil and modafinil in patients with excessive sleepiness associated with shift work disorder: a pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic model for predicting
and comparing their concentration-effect relationships. The Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 52,
1328–1342.
Dement, W. (1958). The occurrence of low voltage, fast, electroencephalogram patterns during behavioral
sleep in the cat. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 10, 291–296.
De Jong, B.C., Prentiss, D., McFarland, W., Machekano, R., and Israelski, D.M. (2005). Marijuana use
and its association with adherence to antiretroviral therapy among HIV-infected persons with moderate
to severe nausea. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 38, 43–46.
Feinberg, I., Jones, R., Walker, J., Cavness, C., and Floyd, T. (1976). Effects of marijuana extract and tetrahydrocannabinol on electroencephalographic sleep patterns. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics,
19, 782–794.
Feinberg, I., Jones, R., Walker, J.M., Caveness, C., and March, J. (1975). Effects of high dosage delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol on sleep patterns in man. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 17, 458–466.
Fraser, G.A. (2009). The use of a synthetic cannabinoid in the management of treatment resistant nightmares in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics, 15, 84–88.
Freemon, F.R. (1982). The effect of chronically administered delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol upon the polygraphically monitored sleep of normal volunteers. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 10, 345–353.

Phytocannabinoids as Novel Therapeutic Agents for Sleep Disorders

Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964). Isolation, structure and partial synthesis of an active constituent of
hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86, 1646–1647.
Grotenhermen, F. and Müller-Vahl, K. (2012). The therapeutic potential of cannabis and cannabinoids.
Deutsches Ärzteblatt International, 109, 495–501.
Grant, I., Atkinson, J.H., Gouaux, B., and Wilsey, B. (2012). Medical marijuana: clearing away the smoke.
The Open Neurology Journal, 6, 18–25.
Haney, M., Gunderson, E.W., Rabkin, J., et al. (2007). Dronabinol and marijuana in HIV-positive marijuana smokers-caloric intake, mood, and sleep. Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 45,
545–554.
Hollister, L.E. (1986). Health aspects of cannabis. Pharmacological Reviews, 38, 1–20.
Hsiao, Y.T., Yi, P.L., Li, C.L., and Chang, F.C. (2012). Effect of cannabidiol on sleep disruption
induced by the repeated combination tests consisting of open field and elevated plus-maze in rats.
Neuropharmacology, 62, 373–384 .
Jafari, B. and Mohsenin, V. (2010). Polysomnography. Clinics in Chest Medicine, 31, 287–297.
Jouvet, M. and Michel, F. (1959). Electromyographic correlations of sleep in the chronic decorticate & mesencephalic cat. Comptes Rendus des Seances de la Societe de Biologie et des ses Filiales (Paris), 153, 422–425.
Kalant, H. (2001). Medicinal use of cannabis: history and current status. Pain Research & Management, 6,
80–91.
Mallick, B.N., Singh, A., and Khanday, M.A. (2012). Activation of inactivation process initiates rapid eye
movement sleep. Progress in Neurobiology, 97, 259–276.
Marin, J.M., Agusti, A., Villar, I., et al. (2012). Association between treated and untreated obstructive sleep
apnea and risk of hypertension. Journal of the American Medical Association, 307, 2169–2176.
McCarley, R.W. and Hobson, J.A. (1975). Neuronal excitability modulation over the sleep cycle: a structural and mathematical model. Science, 189, 58–60.
Mechoulam, R. and Hanus, L. (2002). Cannabidiol: an overview of some chemical and pharmacological
aspects. Part I: chemical aspects. Chemistry and Physics of Lipids, 121, 35–43.
Mechoulam, R., Peters, M., Murillo-Rodriguez, E., and Hanus, L.O. (2007). Cannabidiol-recent advances.
Chemistry & Biodiversity, 4, 1678–1692.
Mitchell, M.D., Gehrman, P., Perlis, M., and Umscheid, C.A. (2012). Comparative effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia: a systematic review. BMC Family Practice, 13, 40.
Monti, J.M. (1977). Hypnotic-like effects of cannabidiol in the rat. Psychopharmacology, 55, 263–265.
Monti, J.M. (2011). Serotonin control of sleep-wake behavior. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 15, 269–281.
Morin, C.M. and Benca, R. (2012). Chronic insomnia. Lancet, 379, 1129–1141.
Murillo-Rodríguez, E., Arias-Carrión, O., Sanguino-Rodríguez, K., González-Arias, M., and Haro, R.
(2009). Mechanisms of sleep-wake cycle modulation. CNS & Neurological Disorders – Drug Targets, 8,
245–253.
Murillo-Rodríguez, E., Arias-Carrión, O., Zavala-García, A., Sarro-Ramírez, A., Huitrón-Reséndiz, S.,
and Arankowsky-Sandoval, G. (2012). Basic sleep mechanisms: an integrative review. Central Nervous
System Agents in Medicinal Chemistry, 12, 38–54.
Murillo-Rodríguez, E., Millán-Aldaco, D., Palomero-Rivero, M., Mechoulam, R., and Drucker-Colín,
R. (2006). Cannabidiol, a constituent of Cannabis sativa, modulates sleep in rats. FEBS Letters, 580,
4337–4345.
Murillo-Rodríguez, E., Millán-Aldaco, D., Palomero-Rivero, M., Mechoulam, R., and Drucker-Colín,
R. (2008). The nonpsychoactive Cannabis constituent cannabidiol is a wake-inducing agent. Behavioral
Neurosciences, 122, 1378–1382.
Murillo-Rodríguez, E., Palomero-Rivero, M., Millán-Aldaco, D., Mechoulam, R., and Drucker-Colín, R.
(2011). Effects on sleep and dopamine levels of microdialysis perfusion of cannabidiol into the lateral
hypothalamus of rats. Life Sciences, 88, 504–511.

545

546

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

National Sleep Foundation. (2008). Sleep, Performance and the Workplace. Washington, DC: National Sleep
Foundation.
National Sleep Foundation. (2012). Transportation Workers’ Sleep. Washington, DC: National Sleep Foundation.
Nicholson, A.N., Turner, C., Stone, B.M., and Robson, P.J. (2004). Effects of Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
and cannabidiol on nocturnal sleep and early-morning behavior in young adults. Clinical Psychopharmacology, 24, 305–313.
O’Sullivan, S.E., Kendall, D.A., and Randall, M.D. (2005). Vascular effects of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), anandamide and N-arachidonoyldopamine (NADA) in the rat isolated aorta. European Journal
of Pharmacology, 507, 211–221.
Pagel, J.F. (2009). Excessive daytime sleepiness. American Family Physician, 79, 391–396.
Patil, S.P. (2010). What every clinician should know about polysomnography. Respiratory Care, 55, 1179–1195.
Pigeon, W.R. and Cribbet, M.R. (2012). The pathophysiology of insomnia: from models to molecules (and
back). Current Opinion in Pulmonary Medicine, 18, 546–553.
Pivik, R.T., Zarcone, V., Dement, W.C., and Hollister, L.E. (1972). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and
synhexl: effects on human sleep patterns. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 13, 426–435.
Rechtschaffen, A. and Kales, A. (eds.) (1968). A manual of standardized terminology, techniques and scoring system of sleep stages in human subjects. Los Angeles: Brain Information Service/Brain Research
Institute, University of California.
Reinarman, C., Nunberg, H., Lanthier, F., and Heddleston, T. (2011). Who are medical marijuana
patients? Population characteristics from nine California assessment clinics. Journal of Psychoactive
Drugs, 43, 128–135.
Riemann, D. and Perlis, M.L. (2009). The treatments of chronic insomnia: a review of benzodiazepine
receptor agonists and psychological and behavioral therapies. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 13, 205–214.
Robson, P. (2001). Therapeutic aspects of cannabis and cannabinoids. British Journal of Psychiatry, 178,
107–115.
Russo, E.B., Geoffrey, W.G., and Robson, P.J. (2007). Cannabis, pain, and sleep: lessons from therapeutic
clinical trials of Sativex, a cannabis-based medicine. Chemistry & Biodiversity, 4, 1729–1743.
Sarne, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (2005). Cannabinoids: between neuroprotection and neurotoxicity. Current
Drug Targets. CNS and Neurological Disorders, 4, 677–684.
Sharma, S.K., Agrawal, S., Damodaran, D., et al. (2011). CPAP for the metabolic syndrome in patients
with obstructive sleep apnea. New England Journal of Medicine, 365, 2277–2286.
Swartz, R. (2010). Medical marijuana users in substance abuse treatment. Harm Reduction Journal, 7, 3.
Tembe, D.V., Dhavale, A., Desai, H., et al. (2011). Armodafinil versus modafinil in patients of excessive
sleepiness associated with shift work sleep disorder: a randomized double blind multicentric clinical
trial. Neurology Research International, 2011.
Ware, M.A., Fitzcharles, M.A., Joseph, L., and Shir, Y. (2010). The effects of nabilone on sleep in fibromyalgia: results of a randomized controlled trial. Anesthesia and Analgesia, 110, 604–610.
Ware, M.A. and St Arnaud-Trempe, E. (2010). The abuse potential of the synthetic cannabinoid nabilone.
Addiction, 105, 494–503.
Zias, J., Stark, H., Sellgman, J., et al. (1993). Early medical use of cannabis. Nature, 363, 215–216.

Chapter 30

Cannabis and Epilepsy
Claire M. Williams, Nicholas A. Jones,
and Benjamin J. Whalley

30.1 Epilepsy
30.1.1 Introduction

Epilepsy is a serious neurological disorder that typically manifests as recurrent, spontaneous
seizures or convulsions with possible loss of consciousness as a result of disturbance to the excitatory–inhibitory equilibrium of neuronal activity (Lutz 2004) and affects approximately 1% of the
world’s population (Sander 2003). Epilepsy is both a life-threatening and progressive neurological
disorder with patients exhibiting an average mortality rate two to three times higher compared
to the general population, as well as being more likely to present with at least one learning disability such as speech and/or language disability, cognitive delay, or academic underachievement
(de Boer et al. 2008; Lhatoo and Sander 2001; Seidenberg et al. 1986). Furthermore, epilepsy has
numerous and significant comorbid associations with psychiatric and somatic disorders (de Boer
et al. 2008; Gaitatzis et al. 2004; Téllez-Zenteno et al. 2007). However, epilepsy is not a single
disease, but encompasses a diverse family of disorders, all involving an abnormally increased
predisposition to seizures (Fisher et al. 2005).
30.1.2 Risk factors and development of epilepsy

Due to its complex symptomatology, many different conditions represent risk factors for developing epilepsy (de Boer et al. 2008; Duncan et al. 2006; Sander 2003). Typically, incidence is
greater amongst young children and the older population (Duncan et al. 2006; Forsgren et al.
2005; MacDonald et al. 2000; Sander 2003), males are more likely to be affected than females
even after accounting for gender-biased risk factors (e.g. head trauma) (Banerjee and Hauser
2008; Sander and Shorvon 1996), and the incidence rate in developing countries is typically much
higher than that of developed countries. Epilepsy that develops in childhood, adolescence, or in
early adulthood is most often associated with congenital, developmental, and genetic conditions
(Sander 2004). Conversely, the development of epilepsy through either head trauma, infection of
the central nervous system (CNS), or tumors can occur at any age (Duncan et al. 2006). In the
elderly, cerebrovascular disease is the most common risk for epilepsy (Cloyd et al. 2006; Duncan
et al. 2006; Sander 2003). Furthermore, geographic considerations can be important as parasitic
infections such as falciparum malaria (Carter et al. 2004; Ngoungou and Preux 2008) and neurocysticercosis (Carpio 2002; Maguire 2004) are associated with epilepsy in regions where such
parasites are endemic (Sander 2003).
Each of these risk factors can initiate the process of epileptogenesis; the asymptomatic process
by which a normal non-epileptic brain becomes epileptic. Although the neurobiological changes

548

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

occurring during epileptogenesis remain poorly understood, alterations in neuronal excitability,
establishment of critical neuronal interconnections, and reorganization of such networks have
all been documented before occurrence of the first spontaneous seizure (Chang and Lowenstein
2003; Engel and Pedley 2008; Pitkänen and Lukasiuk 2011). These CNS changes promote recurrent, hypersynchronous neuronal discharges that, over time, recruit other structures into the
epileptogenic circuit until a sufficiently large brain area is involved to manifest clinical, epileptic
seizures. In addition, changes to the functional properties of glial cells have also been described
(reviewed in Steinhäuser and Seifert 2002) and abnormal patterns of neuronal migration have
been seen to result in hyperexcitability of cortical networks (Chevassus-au-Louis et al. 1999;
Farrell et al. 2008; Sisodiya 2004). Furthermore, genetics can play a pivotal role since approximately 40% of people with idiopathic or symptomatic epilepsies exhibit some genetic predisposition
(Gardiner 2000). Importantly, nearly all genes responsible for epileptogenesis encode subunits
of voltage- and ligand-gated ion channels, the majority of which can lead to channelopathies or
alterations in excitatory or inhibitory neurotransmission in the CNS (reviewed in Berkovic et al.
2006; Graves 2006; Rees 2010).
30.1.3 Classification of seizures and epilepsy

Numerous seizures, epilepsies, and epileptic syndromes have been proposed in recent decades
and were largely phenomenological since insufficient knowledge existed to permit a more scientific categorization. In 2010, the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) produced a
detailed classification which will be utilized throughout the remainder of this chapter and is very
briefly described here. Two broad categories of seizure have been described. Firstly, generalized
seizures in which epileptiform activity originates at a specific point within the brain but rapidly
distributes across the brain to affect both hemispheres. Generalized seizures can be further subdivided into three categories: (1) genetic (encompassing epilepsies with a known genetic component), (2) structural/metabolic (arising from a known structural or functional abnormality and
may be acquired (e.g. structural lesion via trauma) or be of genetic origin (e.g. tuberous sclerosis
complex causing nonmalignant brain tumors)), and (3) unknown (arising from an as yet unidentified genetic defect or from another undiagnosed disorder). The second broad ILAE category
is focal seizures in which epileptiform activity is restricted to a discrete region of the brain or a
single hemisphere. No formal subcategorization exists here, but instead a more descriptive series
of categories are utilized that better describe exhibited clinical symptoms (e.g. “with/without
consciousness”).
30.1.4 Current pharmacological treatment

In the UK, there are now more than 20 antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) licensed for used (Kelso 2010;
Martin 2013). The initial therapeutic strategy for the management of seizures typically involves
prescription of a single drug (“monotherapy”; Kwan and Brodie 2000b). Approximately 50% of
patients achieve remission with their first prescribed AED (Stephen and Brodie 2009) and, if this
first-line treatment fails, a further 10% of patients achieve seizure control when prescribed a different AED (Kwan and Brodie 2000a; Schachter 2007). However, despite these apparently high
success rates with current treatments, not only do approximately 30% of the epileptic population
experience intractable seizures regardless of AED treatments used, but of all patients with epilepsy, approximately 50% will ultimately become refractory to drug treatment (Kwan and Brodie
2000a, 2007; Sander 1993). Notably, all existing AEDs are associated with numerous side effects
which often negatively interact with epilepsy’s comorbidities (e.g. emotional lability, cognitive

Cannabis and Epilepsy

dysfunction, impairment of motor function, etc.; Martin 2013). Therefore, there is still a significant clinical need for the development of new, more effective, and better tolerated AEDs and,
whilst well known for the recreational exploitation of its psychoactive effects (see Curran and
Morgan, Chapter 36, this volume), the extent to which cannabis’s pharmacological effects and
tolerability might affect its utility as an anticonvulsant are considered hereafter.

30.2 Use of cannabis in the treatment of seizures and epilepsy
Anecdotally, cannabis has been used for seizure control for many thousands of years. However,
scientific evidence supporting this assertion was not presented until William O’Shaughnessy’s
1840 publication describing the successful treatment of seizures in an infant by using a cannabis tincture (O’Shaughnessy 1840). Furthermore, in 1890, Queen Victoria’s personal physician,
J. R. Reynolds, went as far as to describe cannabis as “the most useful agent with which I am
acquainted” in the treatment of “attacks or violent convulsions . . . (which) may recur two or three
times in the hour . . . may be stopped with a full dose of hemp” (Reynolds 1868). In this section,
we summarize the effects upon seizures either of whole cannabis herb (or extracts thereof) followed by descriptions of the effects of isolated, individual phytocannabinoids on seizures. Caution
should be exercised in interpreting data obtained with herbal cannabis or unstandardized extracts
since, given the diverse, emerging pharmacology of the plant cannabinoids, composition could
significantly affect therapeutic effect. (For more on the composition of the herb see ElSohly and
Gul, Chapter 1, this volume. For more on the molecular pharmacology of plant cannabinoids see
Pertwee and Cascio, Chapter 6, and Cascio and Pertwee, Chapter 7, this volume).
30.2.1 Anticonvulsant effects of whole cannabis

At the time of writing, no full-scale clinical trials have yet been undertaken using either cannabis or cannabis extracts and so evidence of cannabis effects upon seizures comprises a small
collection of individual case studies and the results of surveys of people with epilepsy who are
also cannabis users. Whilst caution should be exercised if attempting to generalize effects from
isolated cases or surveys whose recruitment may be subject to positive bias, a summary of the
extant evidence follows.
In 1967, a single case was published detailing a proconvulsant effect of cannabis in which an
epileptic patient receiving conventional anticonvulsant medication was seizure-free until engaging in a period of cannabis use during which his seizure symptoms returned (Keeler and Riefler
1967). Similarly, a 29-year-old male, diagnosed with bipolar disorder and alcoholism and admitting to chronic, daily cannabis use, reported onset of complex partial seizures following abrupt
cessation of his cannabis use (Ellison et al. 1990). In contrast, Consroe et al. (1975) document
the case of a 24-year-old epileptic who, in addition to receiving regularly prescribed doses of
phenobarbital (30 mg four times a day) and phenytoin (100 mg four times a day), required two to
five cannabis cigarettes each day to remain seizure-free (Consroe et al. 1975). Moreover, an adult
cerebral palsy patient described a “marked improvement” in seizure control following cannabis
use (Mortati et al. 2007).
More recently, in 1997, a critical review of the earlier-mentioned evidence also presented two
new qualitative reports of successful seizure treatment with cannabis (Grinspoon and Bakalar
1997). Here, the first patient found that cannabis smoking abolished petit mal seizures previously resistant to conventional AEDs. The second patient not only reported that cannabis fully
abolished his grand mal seizures and halved the incidence of petit mal seizures but permitted a
reduction in the dose of conventional AED used for seizure control. Moreover and in the same

549

550

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

year, a further 11 epileptic patients were identified as applicants to the US Compassionate Use
Investigational New Drug Program that grants legal, medical exemption from prosecution for
cannabis possession and use (Petro 1997).
Most recently, Hegde et al. (2012) described focal epilepsy patients whose seizures were exacerbated by cessation of cannabis consumption. In the first case, a man (43 years old) with sleep
seizures (~20 per night) from 2 years old, resistant to levetiracetam and phenytoin but reduced
(five to six per night) by carbamazepine, began smoking marijuana (~40 mg Cannabis sativa each
night) and saw seizure frequency fall to one to two seizures per night. Stopping cannabis use on
admission to hospital resulted in ten seizures per night which was reduced to one seizure when he
consumed (orally) cannabis provided by his spouse. In the second case, a 60-year-old man with
a 40-year history of marijuana smoking presented with seizure-related amnestic episodes, ceased
cannabis use on admission to hospital and, within 24 h, entered status epilepticus (a persistent
state of seizure) that was stopped using lorazepam and valproate. The patient ultimately discharged
himself and experienced intermittent seizures partly refractory to phenytoin and continued his
earlier marijuana use. Interestingly, Hegde et al. (2012) make the argument that the widespread but
often intermittent use of marijuana suggests that the appearance of seizures in these individuals
reflects an anticonvulsant effect of marijuana and not part of a withdrawal phenomenon.
Whilst no firm conclusions can be drawn from this small number of case studies, particularly
given the diverse concomitant drug and disease states they comprise and the highly variable composition of the cannabis used, the larger number of patients reporting beneficial effects certainly
justified the larger-scale survey-based studies that have been undertaken.
A detailed review of the literature in 1976 highlighted that cannabis effects upon seizure were
inconclusive despite, as mentioned earlier, the majority of papers describing an attenuation of
seizure activity (Feeney et al. 1976). On the basis of this review, Feeney (1978) conducted a small
survey (~300 “youthful” respondents) to reveal that approximately 30% of epileptic patients
smoked cannabis with no reported effect upon their seizure patterns, although one claimed that
cannabis decreased his symptoms whilst another reported that it “caused his seizures” (Feeney
1978). Furthermore, a retrospective survey of 49 patients (28 male, 19 female) presenting at a San
Francisco Emergency Department with “recreational drug-induced [generalized tonic–clonic]
seizures” on admission revealed cannabis use in 10% of cases although, in all cases, other drugs
had also been consumed (cocaine, amphetamine, or LSD) at or around the same time and all of
which, alone, have been associated with seizures (Alldredge et al. 1989). However, a larger epidemiological survey of, in this case, previous heroin, marijuana, and cocaine use prior to presenting
with first seizure (308 patients with seizures; 294 controls) in New York City between 1981 and
1984, revealed cannabis use as a protective factor against provoked and unprovoked first seizures
in men (Brust et al. 1992; Ng et al. 1990). Finally, an interview-based study with more than 215
cannabis-using patients with active epilepsy not only showed that 90.2% of patients did not identify a relationship between cannabis use and their seizure frequency or severity but that 2.3% and
7.4% thought their seizures were more or less frequent around the time of cannabis use, respectively. Similar results were found in a telephone survey of patients treated at a tertiary care epilepsy center in Canada in 2004 where 68% of patients reported beneficial effects of cannabis upon
seizure severity whilst 54% reported that cannabis reduced seizure frequency (Gross et al. 2004).
Given the typically intractable nature of epilepsies referred to tertiary care centers, it is interesting
to note the greater emphasis placed upon putatively beneficial effects by this patient population
most resistant to conventional AEDs. Finally, in three more recent surveys, 3.6% of German medical marijuana users reported using cannabis for seizure control (Schnelle et al. 1999) whilst cannabis was used for seizure control by 4% of patients (population size: 77) supported by a medical

Cannabis and Epilepsy

cannabis program in the US (Corral 2001) and by 1% of patients (population size: ~2500) using
medical cannabis in California, US (Gieringer 2001). Whilst this evidence clearly supports an
overall anticonvulsant effect of cannabis in epilepsy, the labile nature of epilepsy, the variable composition of herbal cannabis, and its psychoactive effects argue against its widespread use beyond
otherwise intractable cases.
30.2.2 Preclinical evidence of seizure-related effects of cannabis

Following on from the small number of case studies and surveys described in section 30.2.1, a
variety of preclinical studies investigating the effects of cannabis upon seizure and epilepsy have
been completed. In one of the earliest preclinical investigations, Ghosh and colleagues examined
the effects of a cannabis resin (17% Δ9-THC content; intraperitoneal (i.p.)), alone or in combination with a range of monoamine and catecholamine modulators (none of which affected seizure
parameters alone), on maximal electroshock (MES) seizures in rats (Ghosh and Bhattacharya
1978). The MES model of generalized tonic–clonic seizures has been an important tool in the discovery of new potential AEDs for over 60 years due to its rapid throughput and clearly definable
seizure endpoints although these advantages also represent limitations since it poorly discriminates between AEDs or the seizures against which a candidate AED might be effective (Bialer
and White 2010; Löscher 2011; Mares and Kubova 2006; White 1997; White et al. 1995). In this
model, tonic–clonic seizures are induced in healthy rodents by a brief electrical stimulation of
the cornea (Löscher 2011; Mares and Kubova 2006; Swinyard 1949; Woodbury and Davenport
1952). Here, Ghosh et al. (1978) reported a monoamine involvement in the significant anticonvulsant effect of cannabis as indicated by the loss of this effect when it was coadministered with
reserpine. Coadministration of 5-6-dihydroxytryptamine (DHT; selectively destroys serotonergic
neurons) with cannabis, abolished the anticonvulsant effect of cannabis whilst its coadministration with 6-hydroxydopamine (6-HD; ablates adrenergic neurons) did not. Together these results
suggest that the anticonvulsant effects of cannabis in MES seizures involve serotonergic signaling.
However, it should be noted that the cannabinoid composition of the cannabis extract used—
beyond the Δ9-THC content assayed—was not presented such that it remains unclear which
cannabinoid, noncannabinoid, or combination thereof was responsible for the serotonergically
mediated anticonvulsant effect seen (Ghosh and Bhattacharya 1978).
Furthermore, Labrecque et al. (1978) examined acute and chronic effects of cannabis on seizures induced by subconvulsant penicillin (750,000 IU; intravenous (i.v.)) in mongrel dogs. Dogs
“smoked” cannabis cigarettes containing 6 mg Δ9-THC via a tracheotomy; either eight cigarettes
for the acute condition or four cigarettes per day for 10 weeks in the chronic condition prior to
penicillin treatment to induce seizures. In the acute condition, penicillin treatment did not produce any seizure behavior in control animals, but four out of five cannabis-treated dogs exhibited
muscular jerks and one showed clonic movements. Electrocorticography (ECoG) recordings
from this group showed characteristic arousal activity following application of an external stimulus that was replaced by epileptiform activity in the occipital cortex lasting 3–6 sec. In the chronic
condition, penicillin treatment produced the appearance of similar epileptiform activity in both
occipital and frontal cortices that was followed by generalization of the epileptiform activity and
the appearance of grand mal seizures approximately 90 min after penicillin administration. The
authors thus proposed that cannabis reduced the threshold for seizure, increased blood–brain
barrier (BBB) permeability to penicillin, or the possibility of both contributing to the effects seen
although their hypothesis of Δ9-THC-induced changes to BBB permeability was not borne out in
a study conducted around the same time (Segal et al. 1978).

551

552

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Taken together, the results of these limited preclinical investigations indicate a propensity for
cannabis to exert an anticonvulsant effect. However, when the highly variable and idiopathic
nature of epilepsy is considered alongside the different phytocannabinoid compositions of the
cannabis types used, the variable routes of administration, and the presence of complicating concomitant disease states and drugs, it is no surprise that a single conclusion regarding cannabis’s
effects on seizure cannot be drawn. However, in the next section we examine evidence from the
more numerous preclinical investigations and small-scale clinical trials that have used individual
phytocannabinoids.
30.2.3 Anticonvulsant effects of individual phytocannabinoid

constituents

The identification and isolation of discrete constituents within cannabis have aided the investigation of their individual effects upon seizure. However, despite the numerous phytocannabinoids present in cannabis (for more on the constituents of cannabis please see ElSohly and
Gul, Chapter 1, this volume), investigation of individual phytocannabinoid effects upon seizure
remain limited to numerous studies of two of the phytocannabinoids that are usually present
in smoked or heated cannabis, Δ9-THC and cannabidiol (CBD), with a much smaller number
examining, cannabinol (CBN), Δ 9-tetrahydrocannabivarin (Δ 9-THCV), and cannabidivarin
(CBDV). Thus, whilst the evidence for these two principal cannabinoids and CBDV is strong, the
large number of plant cannabinoids with unstudied effects on seizures represents as yet unrealized potential in drug discovery.
30.2.3.1 Tetrahydrocannabinol

One of the earliest reports from the 1940s documents that Δ9-THC administration to a small sample
of epileptic children (n = 5; orally (p.o.)) with seizures resistant to phenobarbital or phenytoin treatment, controlled seizures in two of the children although no change in seizure frequency was noted
in the remaining three children (Davis et al. 1949). However, despite the promise of this preliminary
finding, subsequent evidence of Δ9-THC effects upon seizures remains limited to a number of
preclinical animal studies undertaken during the 1970s and 1980s which are summarized hereafter.
Using an audiogenic seizure model, in which seizures in C57BL/6 mice are induced by a priming auditory stimulus at 19 days of age and then triggered by the same stimulus 9 days later,
Δ9-THC showed significant anticonvulsant activity (Boggan et al. 1973). Doses (i.p.) of between
2.5 and 10 mg/kg Δ9-THC were administered 15 min prior to the seizure trigger and 10 mg/kg
Δ9-THC administered 15–45 min prior to the seizure trigger significantly reduced the number
of animals exhibiting any signs of seizure. Interestingly, when treated with 10 mg/kg Δ9-THC
before the priming stimulus, only groups treated 15–45 min prior to priming showed significantly
reduced seizure signs whilst ∆9-THC administration after priming had no effect upon seizures.
Similar anticonvulsant effects have been reported using the MES model of seizure where
­Δ9-THC (160–200 mg/kg) protected against hind limb extension in a QS strain of mice (Chesher
and Jackson 1974) and led the authors to propose an ED50 of Δ9-THC “for protection against
convulsions after oral administration appears to be greater than 200 mg/kg.” Interestingly, the
authors also reveal administration route-dependent variation in effects since Δ9-THC at 20 and
75 mg/kg p.o. significantly lengthened hind limb extension time, indicative of a proconvulsant
effect, whilst 20 mg/kg Δ9-THC i.v. significantly decreased hind limb extension time. This study
also demonstrated that the effects of a “proconvulsant” dose of Δ9-THC (50 mg/kg via oral gavage)
could be reversed by coadministration with CBD plus CBN (both 50 mg/kg via oral gavage, doses

Cannabis and Epilepsy

previously shown to have no effect upon MES seizures alone; see later and Chapters 6 and 7 in this
volume). Finally, this study also demonstrated a significantly reduced EC50 for phenytoin when
coadministered with Δ9-THC (50 mg/kg p.o.) that was even further reduced by coadministration of Δ9-THC plus CBD (each 50 mg/kg p.o.). However, in generalized seizures induced by the
administration of pentylenetetrazole (PTZ) to the same strain of mice, Δ9-THC (1–80 mg/kg p.o.
30 min prior to seizure induction) had no significant effect.
Subsequent work by Chesher and colleagues investigated whether Δ 9-THC modulated phenobarbitone’s anticonvulsant actions (Chesher et al. 1975). Here, and using the MES model
of generalized seizure in QS mice, phenobarbitone (9.3–40 mg/kg; i.p.; 1 h prior to MES) was
coadministered with Δ9-THC (25–50 mg/kg) and CBD (see later; both drugs p.o. 2 h prior to
MES). Δ9-THC and CBD (each at 50 mg/kg) each significantly potentiated the beneficial effect
of phenobarbitone on the presence and duration of hind limb extension although the greatest
potentiation was produced by Δ9-THC coadministration with phenobarbitone. Most notably, and
in keeping with the synergism associated with phenytoin described earlier (Chesher and Jackson
1974), coadministration of Δ9-THC plus CBD (each at 25 mg/kg) with phenobarbitone potentiated its effects to the same extent as that seen following the coadministration of phenobarbitone
with 50 mg/kg Δ9-THC only.
In a useful counterpoint to the investigation summarized earlier (Chesher and Jackson 1974),
an important series of studies that compared phenobarbitone and phenytoin treatment, with
­Δ9-THC and CBD (see later) treatments, in the maximal (MES), 6 Hz and 60 Hz electroshock
models of generalized seizure were undertaken (Karler and Turkanis 1980). Here, animals received
(all i.p.) 100 mg/kg Δ9-THC, 120 mg/kg CBD, 9 mg/kg phenytoin, or 12 mg/kg phenobarbitone
as a single dose or daily for 3–4 days. The study confirmed the anticonvulsant actions of single
doses of Δ9-THC and CBD in the 6 Hz and MES models and revealed CBD to be ineffective in the
60 Hz test whilst Δ9-THC reduced threshold to seizure (a proconvulsant effect). Single treatments
with phenytoin and phenobarbitone increased threshold to seizure in the 6 Hz and MES models
although, in the 60 Hz model, this effect was not present for phenytoin. In the repeated dosing
paradigm employed, tolerance to phenobarbitone appeared in the 6 Hz model but the effects of
phenytoin, Δ9-THC, and CBD were unaffected. Repeated drug treatment and use of the 60 Hz
model were as seen following acute treatment except for phenytoin and phenobarbitone where
increased and decreased thresholds respectively were seen. Interestingly, this study also investigated the effects of drug withdrawal after 3–4 days of administration where, in the 6 Hz model,
Δ9-THC withdrawal reduced seizure threshold, phenobarbitone and phenytoin withdrawal had
no effect, whilst CBD withdrawal increased seizure thresholds. In the MES model, only phenobarbitone withdrawal decreased seizure threshold and no alterations were seen as a result of
withdrawal of the other drugs used. Finally, in the 60 Hz model, Δ9-THC and phenobarbitone
withdrawal decreased threshold whilst CBD and phenytoin increased seizure threshold. Taken
together, these results suggest that Δ9-THC’s anticonvulsant activity could be subject to some tolerance and withdrawal effects that are not replicated with CBD and so may reflect their differing
pharmacology (Nocerino et al. 2000).
In a study that shed further light on this issue of tolerance, a spontaneously epileptic, adult
gerbil strain (proposed to be a model of idiopathic human epilepsy; Loskota and Lomax 1975;
Loskota et al. 1974) was employed to examine the effects of acute (single dose) and chronic (daily
for 6 days) Δ9-THC (20 or 50 mg/kg; i.p.) treatment upon seizure. Here, no significant effects
were seen following acute or chronic 20 mg/kg Δ9-THC treatment, although significant decreases
in latency to seizure, duration of seizure, and seizure score were seen in animals acutely, but not
chronically, treated with 50 mg/kg Δ9-THC which could suggest a tolerance effect.

553

554

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

In a valuable study comparing the dose–response relationships of Δ9-THC (up to 80 mg/kg; i.p.),
phenytoin, chlordiazepoxide, and phenobarbitone upon MES-, PTZ-, nicotine-, and strychnineinduced seizures in mice (Sofia et al. 1974), the following results were reported. In MES seizures,
Δ9-THC markedly increased latency to hind limb extension, an effect mirrored by the three
standard AED comparators used. In both strychnine- and PTZ-induced seizures, phenobarbitone
and chlordiazepoxide exerted protective effects whilst neither phenytoin nor Δ9-THC protected
against these seizures. None of the tested compounds exerted any effect in the nicotine-induced
seizure model used. The authors interpreted these effects as indicative of a specific anticonvulsant
effect of phenytoin and Δ9-THC which was in direct contrast to the generalized sedative-hypnotic,
GABA-mediated actions underlying chlordiazepoxide and phenobarbitone effects in all bar one of
the models used.
Whilst of dubious relevance given the uncertain etiology of the phenomenon studied, a study
employing ECoG found that “polyspikes” (spike discharges induced by electrode implantation) in
cortex, amygdala, and cerebellum but not hippocampus or thalamus were augmented by either
acute or chronic (daily up to 140 days) 10 mg/kg p.o. Δ9-THC (Stadnicki et al. 1974) although
behavioral manifestation of seizure (jerking movement of head and paws) was seen in only one of
the six treated animals. Furthermore, Δ9-THC-induced convulsions were reported in a susceptible rabbit population (Martin and Consroe 1976) that exhibited a variety of seizure symptoms following Δ9-THC treatments as low as 0.5 mg/kg i.v. which reduced in frequency and severity after
repeated Δ9-THC doses. The effect of a number of other plant cannabinoids (all i.v.) upon these
animals was also examined (CBN (10 mg/kg), CBD (10–20 mg/kg), cannabichromene (CBC, 8
mg/kg), 11-OH-Δ9-THC (0.5 mg/kg), and Δ8-THC (0.5 mg/kg)) where THC forms and CBN
produced similar convulsions but neither CBD nor CBC had any detectable effect. The effects
of a number of conventional AEDs upon Δ9-THC-induced (0.5 mg/kg; i.v.) convulsions in these
animals were also investigated by this group (Consroe et al. 1977) where carbamazepine (EC50:
2 mg/kg), diazepam (EC50: 4.7 mg/kg), phenytoin (EC50: 10.9 mg/kg), phenobarbital (EC50: 56.9
mg/kg) and ethosuximide (EC50: 306 mg/kg) inhibited seizures although the latter two drugs also
produced toxic effects. Interestingly, CBD (EC50: 19.7 mg/kg) inhibited these seizures but only
when given prior to (c.f. concurrently) Δ9-THC. Whilst these are very interesting reports, from a
modern perspective, the lack of a defined basis for the rabbits’ genetic susceptibility to Δ9-THCinduced seizures prevents more widely generalizable conclusions from being drawn.
A number of other studies have been conducted that also used less conventional models of
seizure or animal species. Two studies from the early 1970s used an electrical kindling model
that targets the amygdala in cats to investigate potential antiepileptic and prophylactic actions of
Δ8-THC and Δ9-THC (i.p.; Wada et al. 1975b). In the antiepileptic experiments, animals received
Δ8-THC or Δ9-THC, 1 h before testing for effects upon onset of kindling, appearance of head
nodding (stage 3), clonic jumping (stage 5), and at the endpoint of kindling which represents
the establishment of a low-threshold generalized seizure trigger. Δ9-THC (0.25 mg/kg), but
not Δ8-THC (0.25 mg/kg), inhibited epileptiform after-discharges at kindling onset but neither
drug affected stages 3, 5, or the endpoint of kindling. In prophylaxis experiments, cats received
­Δ8-THC and Δ9-THC (i.p.; 0.5–2.5 mg/kg) daily during the kindling process (~15 days) and
­Δ9-THC suppressed after-discharges at the start of kindling, effectively preventing the manifestation of spontaneous seizures although ∆8-THC was ineffective. These results supported the assertion that Δ9-THC effects upon seizure may be dependent upon disease progression in epilepsy.
Δ8-THC and Δ9-THC were also been investigated in the baboon, Papio papio, which exhibits
a photomyoclonic response and is also susceptible to amygdaloid kindling (Wada et al. 1975a).
Neither drug (each 0.25–1 mg/kg; i.p.) affected photomyclonus but both either abolished or

Cannabis and Epilepsy

reduced kindled seizures and inhibited epileptiform after-discharge spread; Δ9-THC appeared to
exert greater potency than ∆8-THC. Finally, Δ9-THC effects have been investigated in domestic
chickens, some of which show a genetic susceptibility to seizure following intermittent photic
stimulation (14 fps; IPS). Animals were divided into epileptic and non-epileptic groups based on
IPS responsiveness and the effects of Δ9-THC (0.25–1 mg/kg; i.v.; 0.5 or 2 h before testing) upon
IPS-induced seizures (in susceptible fowl) plus PTZ-induced (i.p.) seizures in epileptic (35 mg/kg)
and non-epileptic (80 mg/kg) fowl were examined (Johnson et al. 1975). Δ9-THC (>0.25 mg/kg at
0.5 but not 2 h) significantly reduced IPS-induced seizure number and severity in epileptic fowl
yet Δ9-THC exerted no effect on PTZ-induced seizures in either population at any dose.
30.2.3.2 Cannabidiol

At the time of writing, CBD remains the only isolated, non-Δ9-THC phytocannabinoid to have
been investigated for anticonvulsant effects preclinically and clinically. Please note that some of
the studies describing CBD effects upon seizure have already been summarized (section 30.2.3.1)
where direct comparisons between Δ9-THC and CBD were made; these studies will not be
described again.
One of the earliest documented investigations of CBD (1.5–12 mg/kg; i.p.) effects against seizure reported significant effects in the MES model when tested 1 h after administration (Izquierdo
et al. 1973) although, in a separate investigation, CBD (150 mg/kg and 50–200 mg/kg p.o.) failed
to affect PTZ-induced generalized seizures or MES, respectively, in mice (Chesher and Jackson
1974). It remains uncertain whether the lack of CBD effect shown in these studies was due to
inadequate CBD at the site of action or a lack of action per se. The first major study that compared
the anticonvulsant effects of CBD and Δ9-THC, in addition to a range of other cannabinoids,
with the effects of phenytoin, phenobarbitone and ethosuximide in a variety of standard seizure
models was undertaken by Karler and Turkanis (1978). Using the standard MES test in mice,
the following cannabinoids (i.p.) showed significant anticonvulsant activity (ED 50 values (or
best estimates of these indicated by *) are shown in parentheses): CBD (120 mg/kg), Δ 9-THC
(100 mg/kg), 11-OH-Δ9-THC (14 mg/kg), 8β-, but not 8α-OH-Δ9-THC (100 mg/kg*), Δ9-THC
acid (200–400 mg/kg), Δ8-THC (80 mg/kg), CBN (230 mg/kg) and 9-nor-9α- or 9-nor-9β-OHhexahydro CBN (each 100 mg/kg). This group’s subsequent work showed that CBD (0.3–3 mg/kg)
raised electrophysiologically recorded, epileptic after-discharge threshold in electrically kindled,
limbic seizures in rats, like phenytoin but, in common with ethosuximide’s effects in this model,
reduced after-discharge amplitude, duration, and propagation (Turkanis et al. 1979). Notably, the
authors concluded that “CBD was the most efficacious of the drugs tested against limbic ADs
[after-discharges] and convulsions.”
Despite the wealth of literature in support of clear anticonvulsant actions of CBD in several
acute chemical models, the literature is somewhat less convincing when considering the effects of
this drug in models of chronically epileptic animals. Colasanti et al. (1982) used cortical implantation of cobalt to produce a model of focal seizure with a secondary generalization and showed
that 60 mg/kg CBD (i.p.) exerted no discernible effect although Δ9-THC exerted a short-term (~1
day) anticonvulsant effect (Colasanti et al. 1982). It is noteworthy that cobalt-induced seizures
share many common features with human absence seizures (Löscher 1997) and so have very little
in common with the seizure models in which CBD exerts a significant anticonvulsant effect or
the epilepsies in which it has been proposed to have potential clinical utility (Karler and Turkanis
1978). Such model-specific effects of CBD have also been shown by Consroe et al. (1982) where
a battery of acute seizure models that included MES, 3-mercaptoproprionic acid, picrotoxin,
isonicotinic acid hydrazine, bicuculline, PTZ, and strychnine-induced seizures were used. Here,

555

556

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

CBD (i.p.; 50–400 mg/kg) was effective as an anticonvulsant in the MES and all of the GABA
inhibition-based models, but was entirely ineffective against strychnine-induced convulsions
(Consroe et al. 1982).
Work from our own laboratory has shown significant antiepileptiform and anticonvulsant activity using a variety of in vitro and in vivo models (Jones et al. 2010, 2012). Using our in vitro models,
spontaneous epileptiform local field potentials (LFPs) were induced, by omission of Mg2+ ions
from, or addition of the K+ channel blocker, 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) to the bathing solution, in
acute, transverse hippocampal brain slices. In the Mg2+-free model, CBD (100 µM) decreased epileptiform LFP burst amplitude and duration, whilst in the 4-AP model, CBD (100 µM) decreased
LFP burst amplitude in one hippocampal region only but decreased burst duration in CA3 and dentate gyrus, and burst frequency in all regions; CBD exerted no effect upon propagation of epileptiform activity. Subsequently, we examined the anticonvulsant actions of 1, 10, and 100 mg/kg CBD
(i.p., 60 min prior to convulsant challenge) in three different in vivo seizure models using Wistar
Kyoto rats. In the PTZ-induced acute, generalized seizures model, 100 mg/kg CBD significantly
decreased mortality and the incidence of tonic–clonic seizures (Jones et al. 2010), whilst in the acute
pilocarpine model of temporal lobe seizures all doses of CBD significantly reduced the percentage
of animals experiencing the most severe seizures (Jones et al. 2012). Finally, in the penicillin model
of partial seizures, 10 and 100 mg/kg CBD significantly decreased the percentage of animals dying
as a result of seizures and all doses of CBD also decreased the percentage of animals experiencing
the most severe tonic–clonic seizures (Jones et al. 2012).
In the clinical setting, one of the first published studies documenting an anticonvulsant CBD
effect was published in the early 1980s. Here, a small group of 15 patients who experienced drugresistant partial seizures with secondary generalization received either 200–300 mg CBD or placebo daily for 4.5 months as an adjunct to their existing treatment regimen (Carlini and Cunha
1981; Cunha et al. 1980). Of the eight CBD-treated patients, four exhibited no sign of seizure at
the end of the treatment period, one patient “improved markedly,” one patient “improved somewhat,” one showed no improvement, and one withdrew from the study. In comparison, only one
of the seven patients treated with placebo showed “a little improvement” whilst the remaining six
showed no change and led the authors to conclude that CBD could be of benefit to patients with
secondary generalized epilepsy for whom existing medicines were ineffective. Similarly beneficial
results were also found following a 10-month treatment period with doses of 900–1200 mg/day
CBD (Trembly et al. 1990). However, not all clinical results have been consistent since Ames and
colleagues treated 12 epileptic patients with 200–300 mg/day CBD as an adjunct to their existing
treatment regimen but no change to seizure incidence was found (Ames and Cridland 1986).
30.2.3.3 Cannabidivarin

CBDV, the propyl variant of CBD, has also been reported to show significant anticonvulsant properties. Whilst only a single report has been published to date (Hill et al. 2012), the results span
two in vitro models, four in vivo models of seizure, and tolerability testing which, taken together,
represent a body of evidence warranting summary and comment.
Using the same in vitro models of epileptiform activity described earlier (Jones et al. 2010),
CBDV significantly attenuated status epilepticus-like epileptiform LFPs at concentrations ≥10 μM
in both Mg2+-free and 4-AP models. In the MES model using ICR mice, 100–200 mg/kg CBDV (i.p;
60 min prior to convulsant stimulus) significantly reduced tonic hind limb extension and abolished
all seizure-related deaths whilst also reducing tonic convulsions (50–200 mg/kg) and increasing the
number of animals remaining seizure-free (200 mg/kg). Similar effects were seen in the PTZ model
of acute generalized seizures using adult Wistar rats, where CBDV (50–200 mg/kg; i.p; 60 min prior

Cannabis and Epilepsy

to convulsant administration) significantly reduced seizure severity, mortality and increased the
number of animals remaining seizure-free. Additional experiments using the PTZ model in which
CBDV (200 mg/kg) was coadministered with either of the conventional AEDs, sodium valproate
or ethosuximide, revealed that CBDV was well tolerated and, importantly, acted additively to demonstrate retention of its own anticonvulsant actions. Further experiments using the PTZ model
showed that CBDV produced anticonvulsant effects when administered orally. Thus, 400 mg/kg
CBDV administered by gavage 3.5 h prior to PTZ challenge significantly reduced seizure severity.
Conversely, no anticonvulsant actions of CBDV were evident in the acute, pilocarpine-induced
model of temporal lobe seizures/status epilepticus; CBDV (50–200 mg/kg; i.p.; 60 min before
convulsant administration) in adult Wistar rats failed to exert any statistically significant effects
upon any seizure parameter measured. However, when CBDV (200 mg/kg) was coadministered
with either of the conventional AEDs, sodium valproate, or phenobarbitone, in this model, CBDV
itself exerted significant anticonvulsant actions, most likely as a result of the larger group sizes
employed in an experimental design of this type. Importantly, CBDV acted synergistically with
phenobarbitone to produce a very significant reduction in seizure behaviors.
Since little is known about the pharmacology of CBDV, it is difficult to ascribe a potential
mechanism to explain these anticonvulsant actions with any confidence. However, the few studies
that have investigated its pharmacology present some intriguing possibilities that require further
elucidation over the coming years. Firstly, CBDV may act through transient receptor potential
(TRP) channels with agonistic actions at hTRPA1, hTRPV1, and hTRPV2 channels (De Petrocellis
et al. 2011, 2012), and antagonistic actions at TRPM8 channels (De Petrocellis et al. 2011) in
transfected HEK-293 cells. However, not only does the role of TRP channels in epilepsy remain
to be elucidated, the physiological relevance of the concentrations at which CBDV exerts these
TRP channel effects remains to be demonstrated and so prevents any meaningful interpretation
of putative activity at these channels. Additionally, CBDV inhibits diacylglycerol lipase-α, the primary synthetic enzyme of 2-arachidonoylglycerol in vitro (De Petrocellis et al. 2011), but, again,
no role for diacylglycerol lipase-α in epilepsy has been established.
30.2.3.4 Other phytocannabinoids

Many different phytocannabinoids have been identified in cannabis (Elsohly and Slade 2005), but
relatively few have undergone significant preclinical and clinical testing for their anticonvulsant
actions. In this final section we briefly review the few reports that do exist which describe the
effects of some of the less abundantly occurring minor cannabinoids upon seizures.
Δ9-THCV is a propyl analogue of Δ9-THC (Mechoulam 2005) but is an antagonist at CB1 (Dennis
et al. 2008; Thomas et al. 2005). A single study from our laboratory (Hill et al. 2010) showed that
Δ9-THCV produces significant antiepileptiform activity reducing burst incidence, amplitude,
and frequency in the Mg2+-free model of epileptiform activity at concentrations >20 μM. In vivo,
limited anticonvulsant actions were seen at 0.25 mg/kg i.p. Δ9-THCV which significantly reduced
seizure incidence in the PTZ model of acute generalized seizures although no other measures were
significantly affected.
In an investigation that also examined CBD and Δ9-THC effects (see section 30.2.3.1 for experimental details), CBN (150 mg/kg and 50–200 mg/kg; oral gavage) had no significant effect upon
chemically or electrically induced seizures respectively in mice (Chesher and Jackson 1974). CBC
was also examined in the study described previously (Karler et al. 1978), although the anticonvulsant effect reported therein was tempered by the authors’ observation that this effect occurred
at higher doses consistent with the known toxicity of CBC and, as such, this was unlikely to be a
true anticonvulsant effect.

557

558

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

30.3 Summary
The clinical evidence presented here supports the generalization that cannabis exerts an anticonvulsant effect, and rarely acts as a proconvulsant, but remains reliant on a limited and often
subjective evidence base. Our limited understanding of the molecular basis for the epilepsies, the
compositional variability of cannabis used, variable routes of administration, concomitant use of
prescription and illicit drugs, and relevant comorbidities hinder more definitive clinical conclusions. Moreover, the psychotropic effects of Δ9-THC will limit or prohibit widespread therapeutic
use, particularly in epilepsy where regular, repeated dosing is necessary for the life of the patient.
However, not only do all licensed AEDs exert significant motor and or cognitive side effects
(Fisher 2012) but many epilepsy patients cannot drive or maintain employment because of drug
side effects, poorly controlled seizures, or a combination of the two (Besag 2001); circumstances
that might lessen concerns about Δ9-THC’s psychoactivity, particularly given its use as a licensed
medicine since the early 1980s.
Conversely, CBD not only represents the most widely investigated phytocannabinoid after
Δ9-THC but, compared with Δ9-THC, is more reliably anticonvulsant, exhibiting clinically beneficial effects in epileptic children resistant to antiepileptic medications. Moreover, in contrast to
licensed AEDs, CBD was well tolerated in pediatric subjects and has not exhibited neurotoxic or
motor side effects (Consroe et al. 1981; Jones et al. 2012; Martin et al. 1987). However, it is notable
that repeated-dosing studies of CBD have not been undertaken in spontaneously epileptic animal
disease models which are a crucial requirement for the assessment of any compound’s potential
for translation to clinical assessment. CBDV, CBD’s naturally occurring propyl derivative, may
display greater efficacy than CBD although direct comparison using a range of animal models or,
ideally, in a human clinical trial, is required to categorically demonstrate this. In view of the broad
anticonvulsant effects and well-tolerated nature of both drugs, such studies are clearly warranted
given the unmet clinical need that has characterized epilepsy for so long.

References
Alldredge, B.K., Lowenstein, D.H., and Simon, R.P. (1989). Seizures associated with recreational drug
abuse. Neurology, 39(8), 1037–1039.
Ames, F.R. and Cridland, S. (1986). Anticonvulsant effect of cannabidiol. South African Medical Journal,
69(1), 14.
Banerjee, P.N. and Hauser, A.W. (2008). Incidence and prevalence. In: J. Engel and T.A. Pedley (eds.).
Epilepsy: A Comprehensive Textbook. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Berkovic, S.F., Mulley, J.C., Scheffer, I.E., and Petrou, S. (2006). Human epilepsies: interaction of genetic
and acquired factors. Trends in Neurosciences, 29, 391–397.
Besag, F.M. (2001). Behavioural effects of the new anticonvulsants. Drug Safety, 24(7), 513–536.
Bialer, M. and White, H.S. (2010). Key factors in the discovery and development of new antiepileptic
drugs. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 9, 68–82.
Boggan, W.O., Steele, R.A., and Freedman, D.X. (1973). 9 -Tetrahydrocannabinol effect on audiogenic
seizure susceptibility. Psychopharmacologia, 29(2), 101–106.
Brust, J.C., Ng, S.K., Hauser, A.W., and Susser, M. (1992). Marijuana use and the risk of new onset seizures. Transactions of American Clinical Association, 103, 176–181.
Carlini, E.A. and Cunha, J.M. (1981). Hypnotic and antiepileptic effects of cannabidiol. Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 21(8–9 Suppl), 417S–427S.
Carpio, A. (2002). Neurocysticercosis: an update. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2, 751–762.
Carter, J.A., Neville, B.G.R., White, S., et al. (2004). Increased prevalence of epilepsy associated with severe
falciparum malaria in children. Epilepsia, 45, 978–981.

Cannabis and Epilepsy

Chang, B.S. and Lowenstein, D.H. (2003). Mechanisms of disease: epilepsy. New England Journal of
Medicine, 349, 1257–1266.
Chesher, G.B. and Jackson, D.M. (1974). Anticonvulsant effects of cannabinoids in mice: drug interactions
within cannabinoids and cannabinoid interactions with phenytoin. Psychopharmacologia, 37(3), 255–264.
Chesher, G.B., Jackson, D.M., and Malor, R.M. (1975). Interaction of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol and
cannabidiol with phenobarbitone in protecting mice from electrically induced convulsions. Journal of
Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 27(8), 608–609.
Chesher, G.B., Jackson, D.M., and Starmer, G.A. (1974). Interaction of cannabis and general anaesthetic
agents in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 50(4), 593–599.
Chevassus-au-Louis, N., Baraban, S.C., Gaíarsa, J.L., and Ben-Ari, Y. (1999). Cortical malformations and
epilepsy: new insights from animal models. Epilepsia, 40, 811–821.
Cloyd, J., Hauser, W., Towne, A., et al. (2006). Epidemiological and medical aspects of epilepsy in the
elderly. Epilepsy Research, 68, 39–48.
Colasanti, B.K., Lindamood, C., and Craig, C.R. (1982). Effects of marihuana cannabinoids on seizure
activity in cobalt-epileptic rats. Pharmacology and Biochemistry of Behaviou, 16(4), 573–578.
Consroe, P., Benedito, M.A., Leite, J.R., Carlini, E.A., and Mechoulam, R. (1982). Effects of cannabidiol on behavioral seizures caused by convulsant drugs or current in mice. European Journal of
Pharmacology, 83(3–4), 293–298.
Consroe, P.F., Martin, P., and Eisenstein, D. (1977). Anticonvulsant drug antagonism of
D9-tetrahydrocannabinol-induced seizures in rabbits Research Communications in Chemical Pathology
and Pharmacology, 16(1), 1–13.
Consroe, P.F., Wood, G.C., and Buchsbaum, H. (1975). Anticonvulsant nature of marihuana smoking.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 234(3), 306–307.
Corral, V. (2001). Differential effects of medical marijuana based on strain and route of administration: a
three-year observational study. Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics, 1(3), 43–59.
Cunha, J.M., Carlini, E.A., Pereira, A.E., et al. (1980). Chronic administration of cannabidiol to healthy
volunteers and epileptic patients. Pharmacology, 21(3), 175–185.
De Boer, H.M., Mula, M., and Sander, J.W. (2008). The global burden and stigma of epilepsy. Epilepsy and
Behavior, 12, 540–546.
De Petrocellis, L., Ligresti, A., Moriello, A.S., et al. (2011). Effects of cannabinoids and cannabinoidenriched cannabis extracts on TRP channels and endocannabinoid metabolic enzymes. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 163, 1479–1494.
De Petrocellis, L., Orlando, P., Moriello, A.S., et al. (2012). Cannabinoid actions at TRPV channels: effects
on TRPV3 and TRPV4 and their potential relevance to gastrointestinal inflammation. Acta Physiology
(Oxford), 204(2), 255–266.
Dennis, I., Whalley, B.J., and Stephens, G.J. (2008). Effects of Delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin on [35S]
GTPgammaS binding in mouse brain cerebellum and piriform cortex membranes. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 154(6), 1349–1358.
Duncan, J.S., Sander, J.W., Sisodiya, S.M., and Walker, M.C. (2006). Adult epilepsy. The Lancet, 367,
1087–1100.
Ellison, J.M., Gelwan, E., and Ogletree, J. (1990). Complex partial seizure symptoms affected by marijuana
abuse. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 51(10), 439–440.
Elsohly, M.A. and Slade, D. (2005). Chemical constituents of marijuana: the complex mixture of natural
cannabinoids. Life Sciences, 78(5), 539–548.
Engel, J. and Pedley, T.A. (2008). Introduction: what is epilepsy? In: J. Engel and T.A. Pedley (eds.).
Epilepsy: A Comprehensive Textbook. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Farrell, M.A., Blümcke, I., Khanlou, N., and Vinters, H.V. (2008). General neuropathology of epilepsy. In:
J. Engel and T.A. Pedley (eds.). Epilepsy: A Comprehensive Textbook. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

559

560

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Feeney, D.M. (1976). Letter: marihuana use among epileptics. Journal of the American Medical Association,
235(11), 1105.
Feeney, D.M. (1978). Marihuana and epilepsy: paradoxical anticonvulsant and convulsant effects. Advances
in Biosciences, 22–23, 643–657.
Fisher, R.S., Boas, W.V.E., Blume, W., et al. (2005). Epileptic seizures and epilepsy: Definitions proposed
by the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) and the International Bureau for Epilepsy (IBE).
Epilepsia, 46, 470–472.
Fisher, R.S. (2012). Summary of Antiepileptic Drugs. [Online]. Available at: http://www.epilepsy.com/epilepsy/
newsletter/sept09/aeds (accessed May 2, 2012).
Forsgren, L., Beghi, E., Õun, A., and Sillanpää, M. (2005). The epidemiology of epilepsy in Europe – a systematic review. European Journal of Neurology, 12, 245–253.
Gaitatzis, A., Carroll, K., Majeed, A., and Sander, J.W. (2004). The epidemiology of the comorbidity of
epilepsy in the general population. Epilepsia, 45, 1613–1622.
Gardiner, R.M. (2000). Impact of our understanding of the genetic aetiology of epilepsy. Journal of
Neurology, 247, 327–334.
Ghosh, P. and Bhattacharya, S.K. (1978). Anticonvulsant action of cannabis in the rat: role of brain monoamines. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 59(3), 293–297.
Gieringer, D. (2001). Medical use of cannabis: experience in California. In: F. Grotenhermen and E. Russo
(eds.). Cannabis and Cannabinoids – Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutic Potential. New York:
Haworth, pp. 153–170.
Graves, T.D. (2006). Ion channels and epilepsy. Quarterly Journal of Medicine, 99, 201–217.
Grinspoon, L. and Bakalar, J.B. (1997). Marihuana, the Forbidden Medicine. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Gross, D.W., Hamm, J., Ashworth, N.L., and Quigley, D. (2004). Marijuana use and epilepsy: prevalence
in patients of a tertiary care epilepsy center. Neurology, 62(11), 2095–2097.
Hegde, M., Santos-Sanchez, C., Hess, C.P., Kabir, A.A., and Garcia, P.A. (2012). Seizure exacerbation in
two patients with focal epilepsy following marijuana cessation. Epilepsy and Behavious, 25(4), 563–566.
Hill, A.J., Mercier, M.S., Hill, T.D., et al. (2012). Cannabidivarin is anticonvulsant in mouse and rat in
vitro and in seizure models British Journal of Pharmacology, 167(8), 1629–1642.
Hill, A.J., Weston, S.E., Jones, N.A., et al. (2010). Delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin suppresses in vitro epileptiform and in vivo seizure activity in adult rats. Epilepsia, 51(8), 1522–1532.
Izquierdo, I. and Tannhauser, M. (1973). Letter: the effect of cannabidiol on maximal electroshock seizures in rats. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 25(11), 916–917.
Johnson, D.D., McNeill, J.R., Crawford, R.D., and Wilcox, W.C. (1975). Epileptiform seizures in domestic
fowl. V. The anticonvulsant activity of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Canadian Journal of Physiology and
Pharmacology, 53(6), 1007–1013.
Jones, N.A., Hill, A.J., Smith, I., et al. (2010). Cannabidiol displays antiepileptiform and antiseizure properties in vitro and in vivo. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 332(2), 569–577.
Jones, N.A., Hill, A.J., Weston, S.E., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol exerts anti-convulsant effects in animal
models of temporal lobe and partial seizures. Seizure, 21(5), 344–352.
Karler, R. and Turkanis, S.A. (1978). Cannabis and epilepsy. Advances in Biosciences, 22–23, 619–641.
Karler, R. and Turkanis, S.A. (1980). Subacute cannabinoid treatment: anticonvulsant activity and withdrawal excitability in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 68(3), 479–484.
Karler, R. and Turkanis, S.A. (1981). The cannabinoids as potential antiepileptics. Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 21(8–9 Suppl), 437S–448S.
Keeler, M.H. and Riefler, C.B. (1967). Grand mal convulsions subsequent to marijuana use. Disorders of
the Nervous System, 28, 474–475.
Kelso, A. (2010). The challenge of managing difficult-to-control epilepsy. Prescriber, 21, 17–22.

Cannabis and Epilepsy

Kwan, P. and Brodie, M.J. (2000a). Early identification of refractory epilepsy. New England Journal of
Medicine, 342, 314–319.
Kwan, P. and Brodie, M.J. (2000b). Epilepsy after the first drug fails: substitution or add-on? Seizure, 9,
464–468.
Kwan, P. and Brodie, M.J. (2007). Emerging drugs for epilepsy. Expert Opinion on Emerging Drugs, 12,
407–422.
Labrecque, G., Halle, S., Berthiaume, A., Morin, G., and Morin, P.J. (1978). Potentiation of the epileptogenic effect of penicillin G by marihuana smoking. Canadian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology,
56(1), 87–96.
Lhatoo, S.D. and Sander, J.W.A.S. (2001). The epidemiology of epilepsy and learning disability. Epilepsia,
42, 6–9.
Löscher, W. (1997). Animal models of intractable epilepsy. Progress in Neurobiology, 53(2), 239–258.
Löscher, W. (2011). Critical review of current animal models of seizures and epilepsy used in the discovery
and development of new antiepileptic drugs. Seizure, 20, 359–368.
Loskota, W.J. and Lomax, P. (1975). The Mongolian gerbil (Meriones unguiculatus) as a model for the
study of the epilepsies: EEG records of seizures. Electroencephalogrophy and Clinical Neurophysiology,
38(6), 597–604.
Loskota, W.J., Lomax, P., and Rich, S.T. (1974). The gerbil as a model for the study of the epilepsies.
Seizure patterns and ontogenesis. Epilepsia, 15(1), 109–119.
Lutz, B. (2004). On-demand activation of the endocannabinoid system in the control of neuronal excitability and epileptiform seizures. Biochemistry and Pharmacology, 68(9), 1691–1698.
MacDonald, B.K., Cockerell, O.C., Sander, J.W.A.S, and Shorvon, S.D. (2000). The incidence and lifetime
prevalence of neurological disorders in a prospective community-based study in the UK. Brain, 123,
665–676.
Maguire, J.H. (2004). Tapeworms and seizures – treatment and prevention. New England Journal of
Medicine, 350, 215–217.
Mares, P. and Kubova, H. (2006). Electrical stimulation-induced models of seizures. In: A. Pitkanen, P.A.
Schwartzkroin, and S.L. Moshe (eds.). Models of Seizures and Epilepsy Burlington, MA: Academic Press,
pp. 153–159.
Martin, P. and Consroe, P. (1976). Cannabinoid induced behavioral convulsions in rabbits. Science,
194(4268), 965–967.
Martin, J. (2013). British National Formulary. London: Pharmaceutical Press.
Mechoulam, R. (2005). Plant cannabinoids: a neglected pharmacological treasure trove. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 146(7), 913–915.
Mortati, K., Dworetzky, B., and Devinsky, O. (2007). Marijuana: an effective antiepileptic treatment in partial epilepsy? A case report and review of the literature. Review of Neurological Disorders, 4(2), 103–106.
Ng, S.K., Brust, J.C., Hauser, W.A., and Susser, M. (1990). Illicit drug use and the risk of new-onset seizures. American Journal of Epidemiology, 132(1), 47–57.
Ngoungou, E.B. and Preux, P.M. (2008). Cerebral malaria and epilepsy. Epilepsia, 49, 19–24.
Nocerino, E., Amato, M., and Izzo, A.A. (2000). Cannabis and cannabinoid receptors. Fitoterapia,
71(Suppl 1), S6–12.
O’Shaughnessy, W.B. (1840). On the preparations of the Indian hemp, or gunjah (Cannabis indica).
Transactions of the Medical and Physical Society of Bengal, 71–102.
Petro, D.J. (1997). Seizure Disorders. Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Co.
Pitkänen, A. and Lukasiuk, K. (2011). Mechanisms of epileptogenesis and potential treatment targets. The
Lancet Neurology, 10, 173–186.
Ramsay, H.H. (1949). Antiepileptic action of marijuana-active substances. Federal Proceedings of the
American Society for Experimental Biology Baltimore, 8, 284–285.

561

562

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Rees, M.I. (2010). The genetics of epilepsy – the past, the present and future. Seizure, 19, 680–683.
Reynolds, J.R. (1868). Therapeutical uses and toxic effects of Cannabis indica. Lancet, 1, 637–638.
Sander, J.W. (1993). Some aspects of prognosis in the epilepsies: a review. Epilepsia, 34, 1007–1016.
Sander, J.W. (2003). The epidemiology of epilepsy revisited. Current Opinion in Neurology, 16, 165–170.
Sander, J.W. (2004). Infectious agents and epilepsy. In: S. Knobler, S. O’Connor, S.M. Lemon, and M. Najafi
(eds.). The Infectious Etiology of Chronic Diseases: Defining the Relationship, Enhancing the Research and
Mitigating the Effects. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, pp. 93–99.
Sander, J.W. and Shorvon, S.D. (1996). Epidemiology of the epilepsies. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery,
and Psychiatry, 61, 433–443.
Schachter, S.C. (2007). Currently available antiepileptic drugs. Neurotherapeutics 4, 4–11.
Schnelle, M., Grotenhermen, F., Reif, M., and Gorter, R.W. (1999). [Results of a standardized survey on
the medical use of cannabis products in the German-speaking area]. Forsch Komplementarmed, 6(Suppl
3), 28–36.
Segal, M., Edelstein, E.L., and Lerer, B. (1978). Interaction between delta-6-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta6-THC) and lithium at the blood brain barrier in rats. Experientia, 34(5), 629.
Seidenberg, M., Beck, N., Geisser, M., et al. (1986). Academic achievement of children with epilepsy.
Epilepsia, 27, 753–759.
Siemens, A.J., Kalant, H., Khanna, J.M., Marshman, J., and Ho, G. (1974). Effect of cannabis on pentobarbitalinduced sleeping time and pentobarbital metabolism in the rat. Biochemistry and Pharmacology, 23(3),
477–488.
Sisodiya, S.M. (2004). Malformations of cortical development: burdens and insights from important causes
of human epilepsy. The Lancet Neurology, 3, 29–38.
Sofia, R.D., Kubena, R.K., and Barry, H. 3rd. (1974). Comparison among four vehicles and four routes for
administering delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 63(6), 939–941.
Stadnicki, S.W., Schaeppi, U., Rosenkrantz, H., and Braude, M.C. (1974). Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol:
subcortical spike bursts and motor manifestations in a Fischer rat treated orally for 109 days. Life
Sciences, 14(3), 463–472.
Steinhäuser, C. and Seifert, G. (2002). Glial membrane channels and receptors in epilepsy: impact for generation and spread of seizure activity. European Journal of Pharmacology, 447, 227–237.
Stephen, L.J. and Brodie, M.J. (2009). Selection of antiepileptic drugs in adults. Neurologic Clinics, 27,
967–992.
Swinyard, E.A. (1949). Laboratory assay of clinically effective antiepileptic drugs. Journal of the American
Pharmaceutical Association, 38, 201–204.
Téllez-Zenteno, J.F., Patten, S.B., Jetté, N., Williams, J., and Wiebe, S. (2007). Psychiatric comorbidity in
epilepsy: a population-based analysis. Epilepsia, 48, 2336–2344.
Thomas, A., Stevenson, L.A., Wease, K.N., et al. (2005). Evidence that the plant cannabinoid Delta(9)tetrahydrocannabivarin is a cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptor antagonist. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 146(7), 917–926.
Trembly, B. and Sherman, M. (1990). Double-blind clinical study of cannabidiol as a secondary anticonvulsant. In: Marijuana ‘90 International Conference on Cannabis and Cannabinoids, July 8–11,
Kolympari, Crete.
Turkanis, S.A., Cely, W., Olsen, D.M., and Karler, R. (1974). Anticonvulsant properties of cannabidiol.
Research Communications in Chemical Pathology and Pharmacology, 8(2), 231–246.
Turkanis, S.A., Smiley, K.A., Borys, H.K., Olsen, D.M., and Karler, R. (1979). An electrophysiological
analysis of the anticonvulsant action of cannabidiol on limbic seizures in conscious rats. Epilepsia, 20(4),
351–363.
Wada, J.A., Osawa, T., and Corcoran, M.E. (1975a). Effects of tetrahydrocannabinols on kindled amygdaloid seizures and photogenic seizures in Senegalese baboons, Papio papio. Epilepsia, 16(3), 439–448.

Cannabis and Epilepsy

Wada, J.A., Wake, A., Sato, M., and Corcoran, M.E. (1975b). Antiepileptic and prophylactic effects of tetrahydrocannabinols in amygdaloid kindled cats. Epilepsia, 16(3), 503–510.
White, H.S. (1997). Clinical significance of animal seizure models and mechanism of action studies of
potential antiepileptic drugs. Epilepsia, 38, S9–S17.
White, H.S., Woodhead, J.H., Franklin, M.R., Swinyard, E.A., and Wolf, H.A. (1995). Experimental
selection, quantification, and evaluation of antiepileptic drugs. In: R.H. Levy, R.H. Mattson, and B.S.
Meldrum (eds.). Antiepileptic Drugs. 4th ed. New York: Raven Press, pp. 85–102.
Woodbury, L.A. and Davenport, V.D. (1952). Design and use of a new electroshock seizure apparatus, and
analysis of factors altering seizure threshold and pattern. Archives Internationales de Pharmacodynamie
et de Therapie, 92, 97–107.

563

Chapter 31

Cardiovascular, Metabolic, Liver,
Kidney, and Inflammatory Disorders
Pál Pacher and George Kunos

31.1 Introduction
There is accumulating evidence from preclinical studies that phytocannabinoids may exert beneficial effects in inflammatory, cardiovascular, metabolic, liver, and kidney disorders. For better
understanding of the therapeutic effects of these compounds, it should be kept in mind that delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is an agonist of both cannabinoid 1 and 2 receptors (CB1 and
CB2), delta-9-tetrahydrocannabivarin (Δ9-THCV) is a CB2 agonist and CB1 receptor antagonist,
and (E)-β-caryophyllene (BCP) is a CB2 receptor agonist (Pertwee 2012). Cannabidiol (CBD) was
initially considered to be devoid of effects on CB1/2 receptors, but recent studies suggest that it
may antagonize the effects of CB1/2 receptor agonists in vitro (Thomas et al. 2007). Additionally,
both CBD and THC are potent antioxidants (Hampson et al. 1998, 2000), which may underlie
many of their therapeutically beneficial effects. Furthermore, at high concentrations both of
these compounds have been reported to interact with a wide variety of molecular targets in in
vitro systems (Izzo et al. 2009), the in vivo relevance of which remains to be established. In the
following sections, we will discuss some of the most relevant in vivo effects of phytocannabinoids
with potential therapeutic relevance in cardiovascular, metabolic, inflammatory, liver, and kidney
diseases.

31.2 Cardiometabolic disorders
31.2.1 Cardiovascular effects with clinical relevance

THC, synthetic CB1 receptor agonists, and endocannabinoids exert complex cardiovascular
effects in rodents and humans, dominated by a decrease in blood pressure and myocardial contractility, mediated in part by CB1 receptors located in the myocardium, vasculature, and neurons
in the central and autonomic nervous systems (Pacher et al. 2005, 2006). Depending on the duration of its use, marijuana may decrease or increase heart rate and decrease blood pressure (Pacher
et al. 2005). A recent controlled study at the National Institute on Drug Abuse reported on the
effects of high doses of oral THC taken over a period of 6 days by 13 healthy male daily cannabis
smokers. Despite the development of tolerance to the subjective intoxicating effect of THC, no
tolerance was observed to its hypotensive and tachycardic effects (Gorelick et al. 2012). Increased
heart rate variability in 72 young cannabis users has also been reported (Schmid et al. 2010). It
should be noted that an elevated resting heart rate is a known independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease in healthy men and women (Cooney et al. 2010), and the selective CB1 antagonist
surinabant inhibited the THC-induced central nervous system and heart rate effects in humans
(Klumpers et al. 2012). Furthermore, the clinical development of AstraZeneca’s peripherally

Cardiovascular, Metabolic, Liver, Kidney, and Inflammatory Disorders

restricted, orally active mixed CB1/2 agonists (AZD1940 and AZD1704) was terminated due to
adverse cardiovascular effects, weight gain, and mild hepatotoxicity (Groblewski et al. 2010a,
2010b), which further highlights the cardiovascular risk caused by activation of CB1 receptors.
In human coronary artery endothelial cells (Rajesh et al. 2010b) and cardiomyocytes tested in
vitro (Mukhopadhyay et al. 2010b), or in mouse models of drug- or diabetes-induced cardiomyopathies, in vivo CB1 activation promotes stress signaling and cell death, and decreases myocardial
contractility (Mukhopadhyay et al. 2007, 2010b; Rajesh et al. 2012). CB1 receptor signaling has
also been implicated in: (1) increased cardiometabolic risk (e.g., plasma lipid alterations, hepatic
steatosis, abdominal obesity, and insulin and leptin resistance), (2) obesity/metabolic syndrome
(Kunos and Tam 2011; Silvestri and Di Marzo 2013) and (3) diabetes (Horvath et al. 2012b),
both in rodents and humans, as well as in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases, including
atherosclerosis, shock, various forms of cardiomyopathies, and vascular restenosis (Pacher and
Kunos 2013; see also sections 31.2.2 and 31.2.3).
In contrast, CB2 receptor signaling exerts protective effects in rodent models of myocardial
injury and atherosclerosis primarily by attenuating endothelial cell activation, the interplay of
activated endothelium with inflammatory cells, and inflammatory cell chemotaxis, infiltration
(Steffens and Pacher 2012).
CBD has also been reported to exert beneficial effects in rodent models of cardiovascular injury
(Stanley et al. 2013) independently from CB1/CB2 receptors, which are highlighted later, in sections 31.2.2 and 31.2.3. Like CB2 agonists, CBD is devoid of undesirable cardiovascular effects in
healthy rodents (Rajesh et al. 2010a) or human subjects (Martin-Santos et al. 2012; Pacher and
Kunos 2013).
31.2.2 Cardiovascular diseases

A study by Durst et al. investigated the potential benefits of CBD treatment in a rat model of
myocardial ischemic reperfusion injury (I/R injury; a model of myocardial infarction). They
found that CBD pretreatment reduced myocardial infarct size, myocardial inflammation, and
attenuated the I/R-induced cardiac dysfunction, as tested 7 days following the insult (Durst et al.
2007). Another study found that acute administration of a surprisingly low dose of cannabidiol
suppressed ischemia-induced cardiac arrhythmias and reduced infarct size when given at reperfusion (Walsh et al. 2010). Although these studies did not explore how the beneficial effects of CBD
come about, they clearly implicated anti-inflammatory mechanisms.
The effect of CBD was also investigated in a chronic model of type 1 diabetes-induced cardiomyopathy (Rajesh et al. 2010a), the pathophysiological mechanism of which is known to
involve: (1) increased oxidative/nitrative stress; (2) proinflammatory and cell death pathways
such as nuclear factor NF-κB, poly(adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribose) polymerase (PARP),
and ­mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs); and (3) inactivation of prosurvival pathways
such as Akt. These effects eventually culminate in cell death and changes in the composition
of extracellular matrix with enhanced cardiac fibrosis and increased inflammation (Pacher
et al. 2007). Treatment with CBD for 11 weeks following the complete destruction of pancreatic insulin-producing beta cells, attenuated myocardial oxidative-nitrative stress by decreasing
myocardial reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, and the expression of ROS generating
NADPH oxidase isoforms p22(phox), p67(phox), gp91(phox). The treatment also normalized the
reduced glutathione content and superoxide dismutase activity, decreased 3-nitrotyrosine formation, attenuated stress signaling (p38, p38α, JNK), and enhanced prosurvival (Akt) pathways in
diabetic hearts (Rajesh et al. 2010a). CBD also attenuated NF-κB activation, expression of key

565

566

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

NF-κB target genes involved in orchestrating the diabetes-induced inflammation and oxidativenitrative stress (e.g., inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α),
and ICAM-1) in diabetic hearts, which was associated with reduced cell death and fibrosis and
improved cardiac function (Rajesh et al. 2010a). Importantly, CBD treatment was also effective
in attenuating/reversing some of the diabetes-induced biochemical and functional changes once
diabetic cardiomyopathy with fibrosis had fully developed (Rajesh et al. 2010a). In human cardiomyocytes or endothelial cells tested in vitro, CBD attenuated the high glucose-induced ROS
generation, NF-κB activation, oxidative-nitrative stress, MAPK activation, proinflammatory
response, and cell death independently of CB1/2 receptors (Rajesh et al. 2007a, 2010a).
Since oxidative stress, cardiovascular inflammation, activation of stress signaling, and cell death
pathways are involved in the pathogenesis of almost all cardiovascular disorders, the results just
described would predict therapeutic benefit from the use of CBD not only in myocardial infarction and diabetic cardiovascular complications, but also in other cardiovascular disorders associated with inflammation and oxidative-nitrative stress.
A recent study investigating the role of CB1 receptor signaling in the pathogenesis of type 1
diabetic cardiomyopathy in mice has revealed novel interactions between cardiovascular CB 1
and angiotensin II receptor type 1 (AT1R) and their downstream signaling via p47(phox)/ROSgenerating NADPH enzyme isoform, advanced glycation end product (AGE)-receptor (RAGE),
and other proinflammatory/pro-oxidant signaling pathways in the diabetic heart, which may
underlie the development of multiple diabetic complications (Rajesh et al. 2012). The diabetic cardiomyopathy was characterized by: (1) increased myocardial levels of the endocannabinoid anandamide, (2) increased oxidative/nitrative stress, (3) activation of p38/Jun MAPKs, (4)
enhanced inflammation, (5) increased expression of CB 1 receptors, RAGE, AT1R, p47(phox)
NADPH oxidase subunit, and β-myosin heavy chain isozyme switch, (6) accumulation of AGE,
(7) fibrosis, and (8) decreased expression of sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase.
Pharmacological inhibition or genetic deletion of CB1 receptors attenuated and/or reversed the
earlier-mentioned pathological alterations and cardiac dysfunction (Rajesh et al. 2012), suggesting a detrimental role of endocannabinoid-CB1 receptor signaling in diabetic cardiomyopathy.
A recent study has demonstrated similar protective mechanisms of CB 1 receptor blockade in
improving cardiac function and remodeling following myocardial infarction, as well as in an
experimental model of the metabolic syndrome (Slavic et al. 2013).
Regarding THC, a recent provocative study found protective effects (reduced infarct size and
attenuated neutrophil infiltration) of an “ultra-low” dose of THC (3–4 orders of magnitude lower
than its conventional dose), administered 2 h, 48 h, or 3 weeks before myocardial infarction in
mice (Waldman et al. 2013). However, THC was only administered as a pretreatment, and only at
a single very low dose, and the role of cannabinoid receptors was not explored.
An increasing number of case reports links marijuana smoking with precipitation of acute
coronary syndrome (ACS) (Singla et al. 2012). Alarmingly, this happens mostly in young healthy
subjects without any prior cardiovascular disease (Leblanc et al. 2011; Pratap and Korniyenko
2012), and the risk of myocardial infarction appeared to be the highest during the first hour of
marijuana exposure (Mittleman et al. 2001). In a prospective study involving 1913 adults hospitalized with myocardial infarction at 45 US hospitals between 1989 and 1994, with a median
follow-up of 3.8 years, marijuana use was associated with increased risk of infarction in susceptible individuals with coronary heart disease (Mukamal et al. 2008). Habitual marijuana use
among patients with acute myocardial infarction was also associated with a 29% increase in
mortality over the ensuing 18 years; however, this did not reach statistical significance because of
the limited sample size (Frost et al. 2013). In a series of cases, myocardial infarction was triggered

Cardiovascular, Metabolic, Liver, Kidney, and Inflammatory Disorders

in healthy children by synthetic cannabinoid use (Mir et al. 2011). Synthetic cannabinoids with
high CB1 agonist potency could also cause tachycardia, loss of consciousness, and diffuse pain in
adolescents (Heath et al. 2012), raising concerns about the recreational use of these compounds.
Increased plasma levels of endocannabinoids were strongly associated with coronary circulatory
events in obese human subjects (Quercioli et al. 2011), as well as in individuals with impaired
coronary endothelial function (Quercioli et al. 2012). Upregulation of CB 1 and downregulation
of CB2 receptors was found in samples of epicardial fat from ischemic compared to nonischemic
human hearts (Cappellano et al. 2012), and CB1 receptor density was significantly higher in atherosclerotic coronary artery sections from patients with unstable angina compared to those with
stable angina (Sugamura et al. 2009).
It should be noted that THC is a relatively weak CB1 receptor agonist compared to many synthetic ligands, is a potent antioxidant, and activates cardioprotective CB2 receptors, which may
mitigate its detrimental effects mediated by CB1 activation. One can also surmise that long-term
exposure to THC can lead to downregulation of CB1 receptors, leading to functional CB1 antagonism. Nevertheless, because of the lack of long-term, large-scale controlled studies in subjects
with regular marijuana use, a solid conclusion on the long-term impact of cannabis or THC use
on cardiovascular mortality cannot be reached. However, the described findings clearly suggest
that the use of natural or synthetic ligands with CB1 agonistic properties will likely introduce
adverse cardiovascular events.
In contrast to CB1 agonists, there is ample evidence for beneficial effects of synthetic CB2
agonists in cardiovascular and inflammatory diseases. Therefore, one might predict that phytocannabinoids, such as Δ9-THCV (Riedel et al. 2009), their synthetic analogs such as Δ8-THCV
(Batkai et al. 2012), or other plant-derived constituents with CB2 agonistic properties (e.g., BCP)
(Gertsch et al. 2008; Horvath et al. 2012c), would have therapeutic potential in cardiovascular
and other disorders, assuming adequate bioavailability (Pertwee 2012). Consequently, the dual
effects of Δ9-THCV as CB2 receptor agonist and CB1 receptor antagonist (Thomas et al. 2005;
Bolognini et al. 2010) if confirmed in in vivo cardiovascular disease models, could offer greater
therapeutic potential than CB2 agonists or peripherally restricted CB1 antagonists alone, particularly if Δ9-THCV turns out to have limited brain penetrability that would minimize CNS related
side effects due to CB1 antagonism.
31.2.3 Metabolic diseases (diabetes and diabetic complications,

obesity)

Obesity is the leading risk factor for insulin resistance that can progress to type 2 diabetes.
Endocannabinoids increase food intake and promote weight gain by activating central and
peripheral CB1 receptors. Consistently, treatment with brain-penetrant CB1 receptor antagonists/
inverse agonists improved multiple cardiovascular risk factors both in preclinical models of
obesity/metabolic syndrome and in clinical trials in obese/overweight subjects (Kunos and Tam
2011; Pacher and Kunos 2013). However, a small but significant number of subjects experienced
increased anxiety, depression, and/or suicidal ideations, which in 2008 led to the withdrawal of
rimonabant from the market in over 50 countries and discontinuation of the therapeutic development of this class of compounds (Pacher and Kunos 2013; Silvestri and Di Marzo 2013). By
that time, evidence had emerged that activation of CB1 receptors in peripheral tissues plays a
key role in adipogenesis, lipogenesis, hepatic steatosis, and insulin resistance (Cota et al. 2003;
Osei-Hyiaman et al. 2005). This suggested that peripherally restricted CB1 antagonists may preserve some or most of the metabolic benefit of global CB1 blockade while minimizing side effects

567

568

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

resulting from blockade of CB1 receptors in the CNS (Kunos and Tam 2011). Subsequent studies
using peripherally restricted neutral CB1 antagonists or inverse CB1 agonists in mouse models
of obesity confirmed that the therapeutic benefit of this approach is comparable to that of global
CB1 antagonists (Tam et al. 2010, 2011, 2012), and one of these compounds is being subjected to
further toxicology studies for potential therapeutic development.
Δ9-THCV, which is a neutral antagonist of CB1 receptors and is found in marijuana, causes
hypophagia in fasted and nonfasted mice (Riedel et al. 2009), and may also activate CB2 receptors (Pertwee 2008). A recent study explored the effects of Δ9-THCV in mice with diet-induced
or genetic obesity. While Δ9-THCV did not significantly affect food intake or body weight gain
in either model studied, it produced an early and transient increase in energy expenditure while
dose-dependently reducing glucose intolerance in genetically obese mice, and improving glucose
tolerance and increased insulin sensitivity in diet-induced obese mice, without affecting plasma
lipids (Wargent et al. 2013).
Numerous earlier preclinical studies and clinical trials with CB1 antagonists in obesity and diabetes demonstrated improved glycemic control, suggesting that CB1 antagonists may also exert
direct effects on diabetes development, independently from their metabolic effects (Horvath et al.
2012b). However, there has been conflicting information about the presence and function of the
endocannabinoid system and CB1 and CB2 receptors in islet cells (Horvath et al. 2012b). Some
of the conflicting results might be attributable to the different species, experimental conditions,
and research tools (e.g., antibodies) used in these studies. It has been recently demonstrated that
CB1 receptor inhibition may increase beta-cell proliferation by reversing CB1-mediated inhibition of proproliferative insulin signaling in beta cells under in vitro conditions (Kim et al. 2011).
However, in an in vivo rat model of type 2 diabetes, beta-cell failure in adult diabetic rats was not
associated with CB1 receptor signaling in beta cells, but rather in M1 macrophages infiltrating
into pancreatic islets, where CB1 signaling triggered activation of the Nlrp3-ASC inflammasome, leading to activation and release of IL-1β, causing apoptotic cell death in neighboring beta
cells (Jourdan et al. 2013). Peripheral CB1 receptor blockade, in vivo depletion of macrophages,
or macrophage-specific knock-down of CB1 receptors restored normoglycemia and glucoseinduced insulin secretion, highlighting macrophage-expressed CB1 receptors as therapeutic targets in type 2 diabetes mellitus (Jourdan et al. 2013).
The effect of CBD was also investigated in primary diabetes. CBD reduced the incidence of
diabetes in a mouse model of type 1 autoimmune diabetes. It reduced insulitis due to a shift of the
immune response from Th1 to Th2 dominance, leading to decreased levels of the proinflammatory cytokines interferon-γ and TNF-α (Weiss et al. 2006). CBD also arrested progression of the
disease in nonobese diabetic mice when it was given after the development of initial symptoms of
diabetes (Weiss et al. 2008).
THC also attenuated the severity of autoimmune responses in an experimental model of type 1
autoimmune diabetes induced by multiple doses of streptozotocin. It decreased lymphocyte infiltration and the expression of interferon-γ, IL-12, and TNF-α in islets, which was associated with
better preservation of pancreatic insulin content and improved blood glucose levels compared to
untreated diabetic animals (Li et al. 2001). In a rat model of streptozotocin-induced diabetes, THC
treatment for 7 days paradoxically improved plasma lipid profile compared to vehicle-treated
diabetic controls (Coskun and Bolkent 2013). Furthermore, analysis of cross-sectional data from
the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III, 1988–1994) indicated
that marijuana use was independently associated with a lower prevalence of diabetes mellitus
(Rajavashisth et al. 2012), and glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity were found unchanged in
chronic marijuana smokers (Muniyappa et al. 2013). These findings may reflect desensitization

Cardiovascular, Metabolic, Liver, Kidney, and Inflammatory Disorders

of peripheral CB1 receptors during chronic use of marijuana in light of the demonstrated ability
of acute marijuana smoking to induce insulin resistance (Hollister and Reaven 1974). A similar
mechanism may account for the lower prevalence of obesity in cannabis users as compared to
nonusers, an effect still present after adjusting for tobacco use, gender, and age (Le Foll et al.
2013). Likewise, repeated exposure of rats to THC in vivo leads to reduced body weight, fat pad
weight, and food intake over the drug injection period (Wong et al. 2012). Interestingly, despite
the reduced food intake and body weight, THC promoted adipocyte hypertrophy accompanied
by a significant increase in cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase expression, an enzyme
involved in packaging triglycerides, and induced macrophage infiltration and increased expression of the proinflammatory cytokine TNF-α in adipose tissue (Wong et al. 2012).
The anti-inflammatory effects of THC in the islets (Li et al. 2001) may also be related to activation of CB2 receptors or other CB receptor-independent anti-inflammatory or antioxidant
mechanisms, which should be explored in future studies. Further preclinical and clinical studies
should establish the potential mechanisms involved in the differential effects of acute and chronic
marijuana use on glycemic control and the development and progression of diabetes.
Considerable evidence suggests that the hyperglycemia-induced increased oxidative and nitrosative stress and activation of redox-dependent proinflammatory pathways such as NF-κB play
a key role in the development or progression of diabetic cardiovascular dysfunction, which
also underlies the development of other diabetic complications including diabetic retinopathy,
nephropathy, and neuropathy (Pacher et al. 2007). As already mentioned, previous in vitro studies suggested that CB1 receptor activation by anandamide in human coronary endothelial cells
and cardiomyocytes may amplify the ROS-MAPK activation-cell death pathway in pathological
conditions where the endocannabinoid biosynthetic or metabolic pathways are dysregulated by
excessive inflammation and/or oxidative/nitrosative stress, thereby contributing to the development of endothelial dysfunction and multiple cardiovascular diseases (Mukhopadhyay et al.
2010b; Rajesh et al. 2010). CB1 receptor activation contributed to vascular inflammation and cell
death in a mouse model of type 1 diabetic retinopathy and in primary retinal cells exposed to high
glucose, and CB1 receptor inhibition or deletion protected against these effects (El-Remessy et al.
2011). CB1 inhibition or deletion also attenuated oxidative/nitrative stress, inflammation and cell
death signaling, and improved cardiac function in models of type 1 and 2 diabetic cardiomyopathy (Nam et al. 2012; Rajesh et al. 2012). Furthermore, beneficial effects of CB1 blockade were
reported in rodent models of type 1 and type 2 diabetic nephropathy (Barutta et al. 2010; Nam
et al. 2012), as well as in diabetic neuropathy (Comelli et al. 2010; Liu et al. 2010) and were attributed to attenuation of oxidative stress, inflammation or cell death related mechanisms (Horvath
et al. 2012b).
One study also explored the role of CB2 receptors in a type 1 diabetic nephropathy model
(Barutta et al. 2011), and found that a selective CB2 receptor agonist ameliorated albuminuria,
podocyte protein downregulation and glomerular monocyte infiltration, without affecting early
markers of fibrosis. They also found that the CB2 receptor was downregulated in kidney biopsies
from patients with advanced diabetic nephropathy, and renal levels of the CB2 receptor ligand,
2-arachidonoylglycerol, were reduced in diabetic mice, suggesting impaired CB2 receptor regulation (Barutta et al. 2011).
In vivo studies also examined the effects of CBD in experimental diabetic retinopathy. CBD
attenuated the oxidative stress, inflammation, cell death, and vascular hyperpermeability associated with diabetes and inhibited p38-MAPK signaling (El-Remessy et al. 2006, 2008). The protective
effects of CBD on retinal cell death were, at least in part, due to the reduction of tyrosine nitration
of glutamine synthase in macroglial cells, thereby preventing the accumulation and excitotoxicity

569

570

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

of glutamine through N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (El-Remessy et al. 2010). CBD also attenuated high glucose–induced endothelial cell dysfunction, ROS generation, and barrier disruption
in primary human coronary artery endothelial cells (Rajesh et al. 2007a), and attenuated the
oxidative-nitrative stress, proinflammatory signaling, and cell death, as already described in more
detail (section 31.2.2), in a model of diabetic cardiomyopathy (Rajesh et al. 2010a).
Thus, in light of the vast body of preclinical and clinical evidence suggesting that CB1 receptor
activation contributes to diabetes development and its complications (cardiovascular, neuropathic, retinopathic, and nephropathic) (Horvath et al. 2012b), the use of cannabinoids with CB1
agonistic properties should be very carefully weighed in patients with diabetes and diabetic complications, even for neuropathic pain. In contrast, CBD appears to have a great therapeutic potential in diabetes and diabetic complications based on animal studies, which deserves to be explored
in clinical trials. Since some of the beneficial effects of CBD and CB1 receptor antagonists share
similarities in diabetes and diabetic complications, and there is evidence that CBD can antagonize
the effects of CB1 receptor agonists in vitro (Thomas et al. 2007), it would be interesting to test if
this antagonistic effect on CB1 is also functional in vivo. Based on the protective effects of a CB2
agonist in diabetic nephropathy it would also be interesting to explore the potential therapeutic
effects of BCP and Δ9-THCV; the additional interest in the latter also derives from its reported
CB1 receptor antagonism (Pertwee 2008), its hypophagic properties in fasted and nonfasted mice
(Riedel et al. 2009), and its ability to ameliorate insulin sensitivity in mouse models of obesity
(Wargent et al. 2013).

31.3 Inflammatory disorders (arthritis, sepsis,

autoimmune disorders)
It is well documented that CB2 receptors are primarily expressed in immune and immune-derived
cells (e.g., leukocytes, various populations of T and B lymphocytes, monocytes/macrophages,
dendritic cells, mast cells, microglia in the brain, Kupffer cells in the liver, etc.) and their stimulation in general attenuates proinflammatory responses (Pacher and Mechoulam 2011). Earlier
studies demonstrated suppressive effects of cannabinoid ligands on B and T lymphocytes, NK
cells, and macrophages, which appeared to involve both CB1 and CB2 receptor-dependent and
independent mechanisms (Klein 2005; Klein et al. 2003). Subsequent studies also found that
endocannabinoids and cannabinoids may also exert immunosuppressive effects by modulating:
(1) T- and B-lymphocyte proliferation and apoptosis, (2) inflammatory cytokine production and
immune cell activation by inflammatory stimuli (e.g., bacterial endotoxins), (3) macrophagemediated killing of sensitized cells, and (4) chemotaxis and inflammatory cell migration (Klein
2005). However, many of these in vitro effects (mostly, but not always inhibitory) were largely
context dependent and influenced by the endocannabinoid or synthetic agonist/antagonist,
­trigger/condition, and cell type used (Pacher and Mechoulam 2011). Interestingly, a recent study
has also demonstrated attenuation of HIV-1 replication in macrophages by cannabinoid receptor 2 agonists (Ramirez et al. 2013). Nevertheless, the anti-inflammatory effects of CB2 selective
agonists have been confirmed in in vivo models of atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, stroke,
inflammatory pain, gastrointestinal, liver, and kidney disorders, systemic inflammation, among
others (Pacher and Mechoulam 2011).
In contrast, the potential role of the CB1 receptor in modulating inflammatory responses was
largely based on the in vitro effects of very high concentrations of THC and a very few nonselective cannabinoid ligands. The interpretation of in vivo protective effects of CB1 agonists in previous preclinical models could also be largely attributed to the direct protective effects of central

Cardiovascular, Metabolic, Liver, Kidney, and Inflammatory Disorders

CB1 receptor-mediated hypothermia in rodent models of tissue injury and inflammation (the
hypothermic effect is absent in humans, but very powerful in rodents), as well as to antioxidant
and CB receptor-independent anti-inflammatory actions. An example for the latter comes from
a study demonstrating that the anti-inflammatory effects of THC in a model of allergen-induced
airway inflammation was similar in CB1/2 double knockout mice, suggesting CB1/2 independent
mechanisms (Braun et al. 2010). Recent preclinical and clinical evidence suggests that CB1 receptor activation may in fact induce proinflammatory signaling in immune cells (e.g., macrophages
(Han et al. 2009; Jourdan et al. 2013; Marquart et al. 2010; Sugamura et al. 2009)), thereby contributing to the development of diabetes, diabetic complications (retinopathy, nephropathy,
cardiomyopathy), cardiomyopathies, and atherosclerosis, to mention just a few proinflammatory
conditions as described in sections 31.2.2 and 31.2.3 (see also Pacher and Kunos 2013).
CBD can also exert multiple CB1/2 receptor independent anti-inflammatory effects, including:
(1) attenuation of endothelial cell activation, (2) chemotaxis of inflammatory cells and adhesion to the activated endothelium, (3) suppression of T-cell and macrophage reactivity and/or
activation, (4) induction of apoptosis in T cells, and (5) decreased microglial activation. In vivo,
tissue protective effects of CBD were described in models of cardiovascular diseases, stroke, brain
trauma, inflammatory bowel diseases, neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases, and
arthritis and sepsis, just to name a few (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2013; Izzo et al. 2009; Stanley et al.
2013). Although primarily based on in vitro assays, a variety of potential therapeutic targets was
proposed for CBD (including transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1), μ opioid, 5HT1A,
GPR55, adenosine A2A receptors, α1-adrenoreceptors, adenosine transporter(s), the MAPK pathway, and the peroxisome proliferator activated receptor γ; Izzo et al. 2009), none of which could
be convincingly validated in multiple independent in vivo studies. The most consistent effect of
CBD observed across various models of tissue injury ranging from diabetic complications (Rajesh
et al. 2010a) to liver (Mukhopadhyay et al. 2011b) and kidney injury (Pan et al. 2009) and neurodegeneration (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2013), appears to be the attenuation of oxidative stress and
inflammatory cell infiltration, and the expression of the redox-sensitive master proinflammatory
transcription factor NF-κB and/or its related target genes, such as intracellular adhesion molecule 1,
iNOS, cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), various ROS generating NADPH oxidases, TNF-α, among others (Fernández-Ruiz et al. 2013; Izzo et al. 2009; Stanley et al. 2013).
The therapeutic potential of CBD was also explored using a murine collagen II-induced autoimmune arthritis model. CBD was equally effective when administered orally or intraperitoneally
in improving symptoms of arthritis (Malfait et al. 2000). CBD-treated mice had a diminished collagen II-specific proliferation and IFN-gamma production ex vivo, as well as a decreased release
of TNF-α by knee synovial cells (Malfait et al. 2000). Preliminary assessment of the efficacy,
tolerability, and safety of a cannabis-based medicine (Sativex®) in the treatment of pain caused by
rheumatoid arthritis yielded favorable effects on analgesia, accompanied by only mild to moderate adverse effects (Blake et al. 2006).
CBD administration also attenuated the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced rise in serum
TNF-α in C57/BL6 mice (Malfait et al. 2000), indicating systemic anti-inflammatory effects.
Another study investigating the effects of CBD in a mouse model of sepsis-related encephalitis that involves the intravenous administration of LPS, it was found that CBD: (1) prevented
LPS-induced arteriolar and venular vasodilation and leukocyte margination; (2) abolished LPSinduced increases in TNF-α, COX-2, and iNOS expression; and (3) preserved the integrity of
the blood–brain barrier (Ruiz-Valdepenas et al. 2011). CBD also attenuated the mortality of
rats exposed to sepsis induced by cecal ligation and perforation, and oxidative stress in certain
organs (Cassol-Jr et al. 2010). Cannabidiol also reduced the host immune response and prevented

571

572

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

cognitive impairments in Wistar rats subjected to pneumococcal meningitis (Barichello et al.
2012). Previous studies have also documented beneficial effects of both CB1 antagonists (Pacher
et al. 2006) and CB2 agonists (Pacher and Mechoulam 2011) in models of systemic and localized
inflammation (Pacher and Kunos 2013). The potential beneficial effects of plant-derived cannabinoids in liver and kidney diseases will be discussed in sections 31.4 and 31.5, while the effects
and therapeutic potential in inflammatory bowel disease, neurodegenerative, and skin disorders
can be found in other chapters.

31.4 Liver diseases
The activation of the hepatic endocannabinoid system through CB 1 receptors contributes to
various liver pathologies such as alcoholic and metabolic steatosis, liver fibrosis, and circulatory
collapse associated with hepatic cirrhosis; conversely CB1 receptor antagonism exerts beneficial
effects in these conditions (Jeong et al. 2008; Mallat et al. 2011, 2013; Tam et al. 2011). In contrast,
activation of CB2 receptors predominantly in infiltrating immune cells or in immune-derived
cells such as Kupffer cells, the resident macrophages of the liver, exerts beneficial effects in alcoholic fatty liver, hepatic inflammation, liver injury induced by ischemia-reperfusion (I/R), regeneration, and fibrosis. These opposing effects of CB1 and CB2 receptors in various liver pathologies
have been extensively discussed recently, and are beyond the scope of this chapter (Mallat et al.
2011, 2013; Tam et al. 2011). Here, we will focus primarily on the liver injury models in which the
beneficial effects of plant-derived cannabinoids have been recently described.
Previous studies using acute models of hepatic I/R injury demonstrated that oxidative/nitrosative/
nitrative stress is involved in the activation of the endocannabinoid system during reperfusion (Batkai
et al. 2007), and the modulation of peripheral CB2 cannabinoid receptors by synthetic agonists
(Batkai et al. 2007; Rajesh et al. 2007) protected against I/R-induced tissue injury and/or vascular
inflammation by decreasing endothelial cell activation and inflammatory response orchestrated
by activated endothelial and Kupffer cells, by infiltrating leukocytes, and by interrelated oxidative/
nitrosative stress (Horvath et al. 2012). The protective effects of CB2 receptor agonists was most
pronounced when given before ischemia, but also persisted when they were administered up to 3 h
following the ischemic insult (Horvath et al. 2012a). Interestingly, the effects of CB2 agonists appeared
to be synergistic with the effect of CB1 antagonists in attenuating I/R-induced hepatic injury (Horvath
et al. 2012a).
A recent study found that Δ8-THCV, a stable synthetic analog of the plant-derived cannabinoid, Δ9-THCV, which exerts known anti-inflammatory effects in rodents (Bolognini et al.
2010), is a potent CB2 receptor agonist both in vitro and in vivo (Batkai et al. 2012). Δ 8-THCV,
given before induction of I/R, attenuated hepatic injury (measured by serum alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase levels), and decreased: (1) tissue protein carbonyl adducts,
(2) 4-hydroxynonenal, (3) the chemokines CCL3 and CXCL2, (4) TNF-α, (5) intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (CD54) mRNA levels, (6) tissue neutrophil infiltration, (7) caspase 3/7 activity, and (8) DNA fragmentation. Protective effects of Δ 8-THCV against liver damage were still
present when the compound was given at the beginning of reperfusion. Pretreatment with a CB2
receptor antagonist attenuated the protective effects of Δ8-THCV, while a CB1 antagonist tended
to enhance it, suggesting that the anti-inflammatory and tissue protective effects of Δ8-THCV are
mediated by CB2 receptors (Batkai et al. 2012).
Cao et al. (2013) recently proposed a key role for monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL), one of
the main endocannabinoid degrading enzymes, in acute liver injury. They found that MAGL
inhibition or its genetic deletion was associated with attenuated liver injury in several in vivo

Cardiovascular, Metabolic, Liver, Kidney, and Inflammatory Disorders

and in vitro models of liver injury. These protective effects were dependent on enhanced
­2-arachidonoylglycerol-CB2 receptor signaling and on a reduction of hepatic levels of arachidonic
acid and various proinflammatory eicosanoids. These results indicated that MAGL inhibitors
might be useful for treating conditions that expose the liver to acute oxidative stress and inflammatory damage (Cao et al. 2013).
Mukhopadhyay et al. (2011b) investigated the effect of CBD in the aforementioned hepatic I/Rinduced injury models. They found that I/R triggered time-dependent increases in markers of:
(1) liver injury (serum transaminases), (2) hepatic oxidative/nitrative stress (4-hydroxynonenal,
nitrotyrosine content/staining, and gp91phox and iNOS mRNA), (3) mitochondrial dysfunction
(decreased complex I activity), (4) inflammation (TNF-α), (5) COX-2, (6) macrophage inflammatory protein-1α/2, (7) intercellular adhesion molecule 1 mRNA levels, (8) tissue neutrophil
infiltration, (9) NF-κB activation, (10) stress signaling (p38MAPK and JNK), and (11) cell death
(DNA fragmentation, PARP activity, and TUNEL). CBD significantly reduced the extent of liver
inflammation, oxidative/nitrative stress, and cell death, and also attenuated bacterial endotoxintriggered NF-κB activation and TNF-α production in isolated Kupffer cells, as well as adhesion
molecule expression in primary human liver sinusoidal endothelial cells stimulated with TNF-α,
and attachment of human neutrophils to the activated endothelium. These protective effects
were preserved in CB2 knockout mice and were not prevented by CB1/2 antagonists in vitro
(Mukhopadhyay et al. 2011b). In agreement with these results a study performed in a rat model
of hepatic I/R showed that the protective effects of CBD treatment extended up to 24 h following
ischemic insult, and involved attenuation of liver injury, expression of iNOS, COX-2, NF-κB, and
apoptosis (Fouad et al. 2012).
A recent study has also demonstrated protective effects of CBD in an experimental autoimmune
hepatitis model via activation of TRPV1 receptor-dependent myeloid-derived suppressor cell
activation (Hegde et al. 2011), and protective effects of CBD were also shown in thioacetamideor bile duct ligation-induced hepatic failure/encephalopathy in mice, effects that were attributed
to potential effects on central 5-HT1A and adenosine A2A receptors (Avraham et al. 2011; Magen
et al. 2009).
Collectively, these results suggest that CBD administration may represent a promising, protective strategy against various forms of liver injury by attenuating key inflammatory pathways
and oxidative/nitrative stress, independent of classical CB1/2 receptors. In addition to synthetic
selective CB2 receptor agonists, Δ8-THCV, Δ9-THCV, and BCP should also be further explored as
potential medicines for the treatment of liver diseases.

31.5 Kidney diseases
CB1 and CB2 receptors appear to have opposing regulatory functions not only in liver diseases
(section 31.4) but also in kidney disorders. In order to explore the role of CB1 signaling in renal
inflammatory processes, Mukhopadhyay et al. (2010a) used a well-characterized model of acute
nephropathy in which the antineoplastic drug cisplatin is used to induce, within 3 days, acute
tubular injury that is largely dependent on inflammation and oxidative-nitrosative stress, and kidney failure. Cisplatin selectively accumulates in the proximal tubular cells via specific transport,
where it triggers mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS generation (Mukhopadhyay et al. 2012;
Zsengeller et al. 2012), leading to endothelial and proximal tubular cell necrosis (Mukhopadhyay
et al. 2011a). This activates a cascade of secondary proinflammatory and pro-oxidant mechanisms, eventually leading to kidney dysfunction and failure. Cisplatin significantly increased
anandamide content, activation of p38 and JNK mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs),

573

574

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

apoptotic and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-dependent cell death. It also enhanced inflammation (leukocyte infiltration, TNF-α and IL-1β) and promoted oxidative/nitrosative stress
(increased expressions of superoxide-generating enzymes (NOX2(gp91phox), NOX4), inducible nitric oxide synthase and tissue 4-hydroxynonenal and nitrotyrosine levels in the kidneys
of mice, effects that were accompanied by marked histopathological damage and impaired renal
function (elevated creatinine and serum blood urea nitrogen) 3 days following its administration
(Mukhopadhyay et al. 2010a, 2010c). Both genetic deletion and pharmacological antagonism of
CB1 receptors with AM281 or SR141716 (rimonabant) markedly attenuated the cisplatin-induced
renal dysfunction and related oxidative/nitrosative stress, p38 and JNK MAPK activation, cell
death and inflammatory response in the kidney (Mukhopadhyay et al., 2010a). These results
suggest that the endocannabinoid system may, through CB1 receptors, promote nephropathy
by amplifying MAPK activation, cell death, and related inflammation and oxidative/nitrosative
stress. These results also imply that blockade of CB1 receptors may exert beneficial effects in renal
(and most likely other) diseases associated with enhanced inflammation, oxidative/nitrosative
stress and cell death. Consistent with these results, Barutta et al. demonstrated protective effects
of CB1 inhibition in a mouse model of type 1 diabetic nephropathy, in which the injury is primarily glomerular (Barutta et al. 2010). They found that CB1 receptors were overexpressed within
the glomeruli, predominantly by glomerular podocytes, and that blockade of CB1 receptors
attenuated diabetes-induced albuminuria, without exerting effects on body weight, blood glucose,
or blood pressure levels in either diabetic or control mice. Furthermore, CB1 blockade completely prevented diabetes-induced downregulation of nephrin, podocin, and zonula occludens-1
(Barutta et al. 2010). In obese Zucker rats, a model of obesity and type 2 diabetes, prolonged treatment with a CB1 antagonist reduced mortality and markedly improved diabetes-induced kidney
function, as indicated by beneficial effects on proteinuria, urinary N-acetylglucosaminidase
excretion, plasma creatinine and urea nitrogen levels, and creatinine clearance. This treatment
was also associated with preservation of pancreatic weight and beta-cell mass index, and marked
improvements in blood glucose levels and lipid parameters (Janiak et al. 2007). It has been found
as well that blockade of CB1 receptors with SR141716 also improved insulin resistance, lipid
metabolism, and diabetic nephropathy in a genetic mouse model of type 2 diabetes (Nam et al.
2012). Treatment with SR141716 markedly decreased urinary albumin excretion and mesangial
expansion and suppressed profibrotic and proinflammatory cytokine synthesis. Furthermore,
SR141716 improved renal lipid metabolism and decreased urinary 8-isoprostane levels, renal lipid
hydroperoxide content, and renal lipid content (Nam et al. 2012).
Importantly, a recent study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) associated multiple cases of acute kidney injury with synthetic cannabinoid use in humans, (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention 2013) raising concerns about the uncontrolled use of potent
CB1 agonists.
Mukhopadhyay et al. have explored the role of CB2 receptors in the cisplatin-induced nephropathy model (Mukhopadhyay et al. 2010c). Cisplatin significantly increased inflammation in mice:
(1) elevating proinflammatory chemokine (CXCL1/2, MCP-1) and proinflammatory cytokine
(TNF-α, IL-1β) levels, (2) augmenting leukocyte infiltration and the expression of adhesion molecule ICAM-1, (3) markedly enhancing the expression of several superoxide-generating NADPH
oxidase enzyme isoforms (NOX2, NOX4, and NOX1), and (4) increasing oxidative stress, iNOS
expression, nitrotyrosine formation, and apoptotic and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-dependent
kidney cell death (Mukhopadhyay et al. 2010c). These cisplatin-induced changes were associated with marked histopathological damage and impaired renal function (elevated serum blood
urea nitrogen and creatinine levels) 3 days after the administration of the drug. CB2 receptor

Cardiovascular, Metabolic, Liver, Kidney, and Inflammatory Disorders

agonists attenuated the cisplatin-induced inflammatory response, oxidative/nitrosative stress,
and cell death in the kidney and improved renal function, whereas CB2 knockouts developed
enhanced inflammation and tissue injury. These results suggest that the endocannabinoid system,
through CB2 receptors, is protective against the development of cisplatin-induced kidney damage by attenuating inflammation and oxidative/nitrosative stress, and that selective CB2 agonists
may represent a promising novel approach to preventing this complication of chemotherapy
(Mukhopadhyay et al. 2010c). In a subsequent study, Barutta et al. (2011) have reported protective effects of a CB2 agonist using a mouse model of type 1 diabetes. CB2 receptor agonist ameliorated albuminuria, podocyte protein downregulation, and glomerular monocyte infiltration
and chemokine signaling (Barutta et al. 2011), which is consistent with the attenuated chemokine
signaling observed in the cisplatin-induced nephropathy model (Mukhopadhyay et al. 2010c).
Horvath et al. have recently explored the therapeutic potential of BCP (Horvath et al. 2012c),
which was identified as a CB2 agonist both in vitro and in vivo (Gertsch et al. 2008), in the
cisplatin-induced nephropathy model. BCP dose-dependently ameliorated cisplatin-induced
kidney dysfunction, morphological damage, and renal inflammatory responses. It also markedly mitigated oxidative/nitrative stress and cell death. The protective effects of BCP against
biochemical and histological markers of nephropathy were absent in CB 2 knockout mice, suggesting that it may be an excellent therapeutic agent for preventing cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity through a CB2 receptor-dependent pathway (Horvath et al. 2012c). Given the excellent
safety profile of BCP in humans (US Food and Drug Administration-approved food additive) it
has tremendous therapeutic potential in a multitude of diseases associated with inflammation
and oxidative stress (Gertsch et al. 2008).
CBD has also been found to exert dose-dependent protective effects against cisplatin-induced
histopathological and functional injury. The protective effects were attributed to attenuation of
cisplatin-induced oxidative/nitrative stress, inflammatory cell infiltration and cell death (Pan
et al. 2009). These findings are particularly exciting since numerous studies have demonstrated
antineoplastic effects of CBD in both in vitro and in vivo models of various malignancies (Massi
et al. 2013). CBD also attenuated I/R-induced kidney injury in rats, by attenuating NF-κB activation, iNOS, COX-2, and TNF-α expression, and cell death (Fouad et al. 2012).
Collectively, the described studies have revealed important opposing regulatory roles of CB1
and CB2 cannabinoid receptors on oxidative/nitrative stress, inflammation and tissue injury associated with nephropathy (CB1 receptors promote oxidative/nitrosative stress, inflammation and
cell death while CB2 receptors attenuate these variables). Thus, both CB2 agonists and CB1 antagonists, alone or in combination, are expected to exert beneficial effects in kidney diseases, prompting a need for additional testing of BCP and Δ9-THCV in various models of kidney injury. The
therapeutic potential of CBD for the treatment of kidney diseases should also be further explored.

31.6 Conclusions
Recent clinical studies have provided proof of the principle that cannabinoid-based extracts
with controlled doses of plant-derived cannabinoids can provide symptomatic relief in a subset
of patients suffering from spasticity and pain as a consequence of multiple sclerosis. On the
basis of the encouraging preclinical studies briefly summarized in this chapter there is certainly
a hope that some of these natural constituents, or their combinations, together with their synthetic derivatives, would eventually contribute to our therapeutic armamentarium for easing
human suffering in various cardiometabolic, inflammatory, liver, kidney, and neurodegenerative
diseases.

575

576

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Acknowledgments
Author’s contribution to the Work was done as part of the Author’s official duties as an NIH
employee and is a Work of the United States Government. Therefore, copyright may not be established in the United States.

References
Avraham, Y., Grigoriadis, N., Poutahidis, T., et al. (2011). Cannabidiol improves brain and liver function in a fulminant hepatic failure-induced model of hepatic encephalopathy in mice. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 162, 1650–1658.
Barichello, T., Ceretta, R.A., Generoso, J.S., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol reduces host immune response and
prevents cognitive impairments in Wistar rats submitted to pneumococcal meningitis. European Journal
of Pharmacology, 697, 158–164.
Barutta, F., Corbelli, A., Mastrocola, R., et al. (2010). Cannabinoid receptor 1 blockade ameliorates albuminuria in experimental diabetic nephropathy. Diabetes, 59, 1046–1054.
Barutta, F., Piscitelli, F., Pinach, S., et al. (2011). Protective role of cannabinoid receptor type 2 in a mouse
model of diabetic nephropathy. Diabetes, 60, 2386–2396.
Batkai, S., Mukhopadhyay, P., Horvath, B., et al. (2012). Δ8-Tetrahydrocannabivarin prevents hepatic
ischaemia/reperfusion injury by decreasing oxidative stress and inflammatory responses through cannabinoid CB2 receptors. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165, 2450–2461.
Batkai, S., Osei-Hyiaman, D., Pan, H., et al. (2007). Cannabinoid-2 receptor mediates protection against
hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury. FASEB Journal, 21, 1788–1800.
Blake, D.R., Robson, P., Ho, M., Jubb, R.W., and McCabe, C.S. (2006). Preliminary assessment of the efficacy, tolerability and safety of a cannabis-based medicine (Sativex) in the treatment of pain caused by
rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford), 45, 50–52.
Bolognini, D., Costa, B., Maione, S., et al. (2010). The plant cannabinoid Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin can
decrease signs of inflammation and inflammatory pain in mice. British Journal of Pharmacology, 160,
677–687.
Braun, A., Engel, T., Aguilar-Pimentel, J.A., et al. (2011). Beneficial effects of cannabinoids (CB) in a
murine model of allergen-induced airway inflammation: role of CB1/CB2 receptors. Immunobiology,
216(4), 466–476.
Cao, Z., Mulvihill, M.M., Mukhopadhyay, P., et al. (2013). Monoacylglycerol lipase controls endocannabinoid and eicosanoid signaling and hepatic injury in mice. Gastroenterology, 144, 808–817.
Cappellano, G., Uberti, F., Caimmi, P.P., et al. (2013). Different expression and function of the endocannabinoid system in human epicardial adipose tissue in relation to heart disease. Canadian Journal of
Cardiology, 29(4), 499–509.
Cassol-Jr, O.J., Comim, C.M., Silva, B.R., et al. (2010). Treatment with cannabidiol reverses oxidative
stress parameters, cognitive impairment and mortality in rats submitted to sepsis by cecal ligation and
puncture. Brain Research, 1348, 128–138.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013). Acute kidney injury associated with synthetic cannabinoid use – multiple States (2012). Morbidity and Mortal Weekly Report, 62, 93–98.
Comelli, F., Bettoni, I., Colombo, A., Fumagalli, P., Giagnoni, G., and Costa, B. (2010). Rimonabant, a
cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist, attenuates mechanical allodynia and counteracts oxidative stress
and nerve growth factor deficit in diabetic mice. European Journal of Pharmacology, 637, 62–69.
Cooney, M.T., Vartiainen, E., Laatikainen, T., Juolevi, A., Dudina, A., and Graham, I.M. (2010). Elevated
resting heart rate is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease in healthy men and women.
American Heart Journal, 159, 612–619.
Coskun, Z.M. and Bolkent, S. (2013). Biochemical and immunohistochemical changes in delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol-treated type 2 diabetic rats. Acta Histochemica, S0065–1281(13), 112–118.

Cardiovascular, Metabolic, Liver, Kidney, and Inflammatory Disorders

Cota, D., Marsicano, G., Tschop, M., et al. (2003). The endogenous cannabinoid system affects energy
balance via central orexigenic drive and peripheral lipogenesis. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 112,
423–431.
Durst, R., Danenberg, H., Gallily, R., et al. (2007). Cannabidiol, a nonpsychoactive Cannabis constituent, protects against myocardial ischemic reperfusion injury. American Journal of Physiology Heart and
Circulation Physiology, 293, H3602–3607.
El-Remessy, A.B., Al-Shabrawey, M., Khalifa, Y., Tsai, N.T., Caldwell, R.B., and Liou, G.I. (2006).
Neuroprotective and blood-retinal barrier-preserving effects of cannabidiol in experimental diabetes.
American Journal of Pathology, 168, 235–244.
El-Remessy, A.B., Khalifa, Y., Ola, S., Ibrahim, A.S., and Liou, G.I. (2010). Cannabidiol protects retinal
neurons by preserving glutamine synthetase activity in diabetes. Molecular Vision, 16, 1487–1495.
El-Remessy, A.B., Rajesh, M., Mukhopadhyay, P., et al. (2011). Cannabinoid 1 receptor activation contributes to vascular inflammation and cell death in a mouse model of diabetic retinopathy and a human
retinal cell line. Diabetologia, 54(6), 1567–1578.
El-Remessy, A.B., Tang, Y., Zhu, G., et al. (2008). Neuroprotective effects of cannabidiol in endotoxininduced uveitis: critical role of p38 MAPK activation. Molecular Vision, 14, 2190–2203.
Fernández-Ruiz, J., Sagredo, O., Pazos, M.R., et al. (2013). Cannabidiol for neurodegenerative disorders:
important new clinical applications for this phytocannabinoid? British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology,
75, 323–333.
Fouad, A.A., Al-Mulhim, A.S., and Jresat, I. (2012). Cannabidiol treatment ameliorates ischemia/reperfusion
renal injury in rats. Life Sciences, 91, 284–292.
Frost, L., Mostofsky, E., Rosenbloom, J.I., Mukamal, K.J., and Mittleman, M.A. (2013). Marijuana use
and long-term mortality among survivors of acute myocardial infarction. American Heart Journal, 165,
170–175.
Gertsch, J., Leonti, M., Raduner, S., et al. (2008). Beta-caryophyllene is a dietary cannabinoid. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 9099–9104.
Gorelick, D.A., Goodwin, R.S., Schwilke, E., et al. (2013). Tolerance to effects of high-dose oral Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol and plasma cannabinoid concentrations in male daily cannabis smokers. Journal
of Analytical Toxicology, 37(1), 11–16.
Groblewski, T., Hong, X., Lessard, E., et al. (2010a). Pre-clinical pharmacological properties of novel
peripherally-acting CB1-CB2 agonists. In: 20th Annual Symposium of the Cannabinoids, International
Cannabinoid Research Society. Lund: International Cannabinoid Research Society, p. 37.
Groblewski, T., Karlsten, R., Segerdhal, M., et al. (2010b). Peripherally-acting CB1-CB2 agonists for pain:
do they still hold promise? In: 20th Annual Symposium of the Cannabinoids, International Cannabinoid
Research Society. Lund: International Cannabinoid Research Society, p. 38.
Hampson, A.J., Grimaldi, M., Axelrod, J., and Wink, D. (1998) Cannabidiol and (-)Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol are neuroprotective antioxidants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 95, 8268–8273.
Hampson, A.J., Grimaldi, M., Lolic, M., Wink, D., Rosenthal, R., and Axelrod, J. (2000). Neuroprotective
antioxidants from marijuana. Annals of New York Academy of Sciences, 899, 274–282.
Han, K.H., Lim, S., Ryu, J., et al. (2009). CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors differentially regulate the production of reactive oxygen species by macrophages. Cardiovascular Research, 84, 378–386.
Heath, T.S., Burroughs, Z., Thompson, A.J., and Tecklenburg, F.W. (2012). Acute intoxication caused by a
synthetic cannabinoid in two adolescents. Journal of Pediatric Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 17, 177–181.
Hegde, V.L., Nagarkatti, P.S., and Nagarkatti, M. (2011). Role of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in
amelioration of experimental autoimmune hepatitis following activation of TRPV1 receptors by cannabidiol. PLoS One, 6, e18281.
Hollister, L.E. and Reaven. G.M. (1974). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and glucose tolerance. Clinical
Pharmacology Therapeutics, 16, 297–302.

577

578

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Horvath, B., Magid, L., Mukhopadhyay, P., et al. (2012a). A new cannabinoid CB2 receptor agonist
HU-910 attenuates oxidative stress, inflammation and cell death associated with hepatic ischaemia/
reperfusion injury. British Journal of Pharmacology, 165, 2462–2478.
Horvath, B., Mukhopadhyay, P., Hasko, G., and Pacher, P. (2012b). The endocannabinoid system and
plant-derived cannabinoids in diabetes and diabetic complications. American Journal of Pathology, 180,
432–442.
Horvath, B., Mukhopadhyay, P., Kechrid, M., et al. (2012c). Beta-caryophyllene ameliorates cisplatininduced nephrotoxicity in a cannabinoid 2 receptor-dependent manner. Free Radical Biology &
Medicine, 52, 1325–1333.
Izzo, A.A., Borrelli, F., Capasso, R., Di Marzo, V., and Mechoulam, R. (2009). Non-psychotropic plant
cannabinoids: new therapeutic opportunities from an ancient herb. Trends Pharmacological Sciences, 30,
515–527.
Janiak, P., Poirier, B., Bidouard, J.P., et al. (2007). Blockade of cannabinoid CB1 receptors improves
renal function, metabolic profile, and increased survival of obese Zucker rats. Kidney International, 72,
1345–1357.
Jeong, W.I., Osei-Hyiaman, D., Park, O., et al. (2008). Paracrine activation of hepatic CB1 receptors by stellate cell-derived endocannabinoids mediates alcoholic fatty liver. Cell Metabolism, 7,
227–235.
Jourdan, T., Godlewski, G., Cinar, R., et al. (2013). Activation of the Nlrp3 inflammasome in infiltrating macrophages by endocannabinoids mediates beta cell loss in type 2 diabetes. Nature Medicine, 19,
1132–1140.
Kim, W., Doyle, M.E., Liu, Z., et al. (2011). Cannabinoids inhibit insulin receptor signaling in pancreatic
β-cells. Diabetes, 60, 1198–1209.
Klein, T.W. (2005) Cannabinoid-based drugs as anti-inflammatory therapeutics. Nature Reviews in
Immunology, 5, 400–411.
Klein, T.W., Newton, C., Larsen, K., et al. (2003). The cannabinoid system and immune modulation.
Journal of Leukocyte Biology, 74, 486–496.
Klumpers, L.E., Roy, C., Ferron, G., et al. (2013). Surinabant, a selective CB1 antagonist, inhibits
THC-induced central nervous system and heart rate effects in humans. British Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 76(1), 65–77.
Kunos, G. and Tam, J. (2011). The case for peripheral CB1 receptor blockade in the treatment of
visceral obesity and its cardiometabolic complications. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163,
1423–1431.
Le Foll, B., Trigo, J.M., Sharkey, K.A., and Le Strat, Y. (2013). Cannabis and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) for weight loss? Medical Hypotheses, 80, 564–567.
Leblanc, A., Tirel-Badets, A., Paleiron, N., et al. (2011). Cannabis and myocardial infarction without
angiographic stenosis in young patient: guilty or not guilty? A case report. Annales de Cardiologie et
d'Angiologie (Paris), 60, 154–158.
Li, X., Kaminski, N.E., and Fischer, L.J. (2001). Examination of the immunosuppressive effect
of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in streptozotocin-induced autoimmune diabetes. International
Immunopharmacology, 1, 699–712.
Liu, W.J., Jin, H.Y., Park, J.H., Baek, H.S., and Park, T.S. (2010). Effect of rimonabant, the cannabinoid
CB1 receptor antagonist, on peripheral nerve in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rat. European Journal of
Pharmacology, 637, 70–76.
Magen, I., Avraham, Y., Ackerman, Z., Vorobiev, L., Mechoulam, R., and Berry, E.M. (2009).
Cannabidiol ameliorates cognitive and motor impairments in mice with bile duct ligation. Journal of
Hepatology, 51, 528–534.
Malfait, A.M., Gallily, R., Sumariwalla, P.F., et al. (2000). The nonpsychoactive cannabis constituent
cannabidiol is an oral anti-arthritic therapeutic in murine collagen-induced arthritis. Proceedings of
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 97, 9561–9566.

Cardiovascular, Metabolic, Liver, Kidney, and Inflammatory Disorders

Mallat, A., Teixeira-Clerc, F., Deveaux, V., Manin, S., and Lotersztajn, S. (2011). The endocannabinoid
system as a key mediator during liver diseases: new insights and therapeutic openings. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 163, 1432–1440.
Mallat, A., Teixeira-Clerc, F., and Lotersztajn, S. (2013). Cannabinoid signaling and liver therapeutics.
Journal of Hepatology, 59, 891–896.
Marquart, S., Zerr, P., Akhmetshina, A., et al. (2010). Inactivation of the cannabinoid receptor CB1 prevents leukocyte infiltration and experimental fibrosis. Arthritis Rheumatism, 62(11), 3467–3476.
Martin-Santos, R., Crippa, J.A., Batalla, A., et al. (2012). Acute effects of a single, oral dose of Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) administration in healthy volunteers. Current
Pharmacological Design, 18, 4966–4979.
Massi, P., Solinas, M., Cinquina, V., and Parolaro, D. (2013). Cannabidiol as potential anticancer drug.
British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 75, 303–312.
Mir, A., Obafemi, A., Young, A., and Kane, C. (2011). Myocardial infarction associated with use of the
synthetic cannabinoid K2. Pediatrics, 128, e1622–1627.
Mittleman, M.A., Lewis, R.A., Maclure, M., Sherwood, J.B., and Muller, J.E. (2001). Triggering myocardial infarction by marijuana. Circulation, 103, 2805–2809.
Mukamal, K.J., Maclure, M., Muller, J.E., and Mittleman, M.A. (2008). An exploratory prospective study
of marijuana use and mortality following acute myocardial infarction. American Heart Journal, 155,
465–470.
Mukhopadhyay, P., Batkai, S., Rajesh, M., et al. (2007). Pharmacological inhibition of CB1 cannabinoid
receptor protects against doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Journal of American College of Cardiology,
50, 528–536.
Mukhopadhyay, P., Horvath, B., Kechrid, M., et al. (2011a). Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 is a key
mediator of cisplatin-induced kidney inflammation and injury. Free Radical Biology and Medicine, 51,
1774–1788.
Mukhopadhyay, P., Horvath, B., Zsengeller, Z., et al. (2012). Mitochondrial-targeted antioxidants represent a promising approach for prevention of cisplatin-induced nephropathy. Free Radical Biology and
Medicine, 52, 497–506.
Mukhopadhyay, P., Pan, H., Rajesh, M., et al. (2010a). CB1 cannabinoid receptors promote oxidative/
nitrosative stress, inflammation and cell death in a murine nephropathy model. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 160, 657–668.
Mukhopadhyay, P., Rajesh, M., Batkai, S., et al. (2010b). CB1 cannabinoid receptors promote oxidative
stress and cell death in murine models of doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy and in human cardiomyocytes. Cardiovascular Research, 85, 773–784.
Mukhopadhyay, P., Rajesh, M., Horvath, B., et al. (2011b). Cannabidiol protects against hepatic ischemia/
reperfusion injury by attenuating inflammatory signaling and response, oxidative/nitrative stress, and
cell death. Free Radical Biology and Medicine, 50(10), 1368–1381.
Mukhopadhyay, P., Rajesh, M., Pan, H., et al. (2010c). Cannabinoid-2 receptor limits inflammation,
oxidative/nitrosative stress, and cell death in nephropathy. Free Radical Biology and Medicine, 48, 457–467.
Muniyappa, R., Sable, S., Ouwerkerk, R., et al. (2013). Metabolic effects of chronic cannabis smoking.
Diabetes Care, 36, 1–8.
Nam, D.H., Lee, M.H., Kim, J.E., et al. (2012). Blockade of cannabinoid receptor 1 improves insulin resistance, lipid metabolism, and diabetic nephropathy in db/db mice. Endocrinology, 153, 1387–1396.
Osei-Hyiaman, D., DePetrillo, M., Pacher, P., et al. (2005). Endocannabinoid activation at hepatic CB1
receptors stimulates fatty acid synthesis and contributes to diet-induced obesity. Journal of Clinical
Investigation, 115, 1298–1305.
Pacher, P., Batkai, S., and Kunos, G. (2005). Cardiovascular pharmacology of cannabinoids. Handbook of
Experimental Pharmacology, 168, 599–625.
Pacher, P., Batkai, S., and Kunos, G. (2006). The endocannabinoid system as an emerging target of pharmacotherapy. Pharmacological Reviews, 58, 389–462.

579

580

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Pacher, P., Beckman, J.S., and Liaudet, L. (2007). Nitric oxide and peroxynitrite in health and disease.
Physiological Reviews, 87, 315–424.
Pacher, P. and Kunos, G. (2013). Modulating the endocannabinoid system in human health and disease –
successes and failures. FEBS Journal, 280, 1918–1943.
Pacher, P. and Mechoulam, R. (2011). Is lipid signaling through cannabinoid 2 receptors part of a protective system? Progress in Lipid Research, 50, 193–211.
Pan, H., Mukhopadhyay, P., Rajesh, M., et al. (2009). Cannabidiol attenuates cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity by decreasing oxidative/nitrosative stress, inflammation, and cell death. Journal of Pharmacology
and Experimental Therapeutics, 328, 708–714.
Pertwee, R.G. (2008). The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology of three plant cannabinoids: delta9tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin. British Journal of Pharmacology,
153, 199–215.
Pertwee, R.G. (2012). Targeting the endocannabinoid system with cannabinoid receptor agonists: pharmacological strategies and therapeutic possibilities. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. Series B,
Biological Sciences, 367, 3353–3363.
Pratap, B. and Korniyenko, A. (2012). Toxic effects of marijuana on the cardiovascular system.
Cardiovascular Toxicology, 12, 143–148.
Quercioli, A., Pataky, Z., Montecucco, F., et al. (2012). Coronary vasomotor control in obesity and morbid obesity: contrasting flow responses with endocannabinoids, leptin, and inflammation. Journal of
American College of Cardiology Cardiovascular Imaging, 5, 805–815.
Quercioli, A., Pataky, Z., Vincenti, G., et al. (2011). Elevated endocannabinoid plasma levels are associated
with coronary circulatory dysfunction in obesity. European Heart Journal, 32, 1369–1378.
Rajavashisth, T.B., Shaheen, M., Norris, K.C., et al. (2012). Decreased prevalence of diabetes in marijuana
users: cross-sectional data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) III.
British Medical Journal Open, 2, e000494.
Rajesh, M., Batkai, S., Kechrid, M., et al. (2012). Cannabinoid 1 receptor promotes cardiac dysfunction,
oxidative stress, inflammation, and fibrosis in diabetic cardiomyopathy. Diabetes, 61, 716–727.
Rajesh, M., Mukhopadhyay, P., Batkai, S., et al. (2007). Cannabidiol attenuates high glucose-induced
endothelial cell inflammatory response and barrier disruption. Americal Journal of Physiology Heart and
Circulatory Physiology, 293, H610–619.
Rajesh, M., Mukhopadhyay, P., Batkai, S., et al. (2010a). Cannabidiol attenuates cardiac dysfunction, oxidative stress, fibrosis, and inflammatory and cell death signaling pathways in diabetic cardiomyopathy.
Journal of American College of Cardiology, 56, 2115–2125.
Rajesh, M., Mukhopadhyay, P., Hasko, G., Liaudet, L., Mackie, K., and Pacher, P. (2010b). Cannabinoid-1
receptor activation induces reactive oxygen species-dependent and -independent mitogen-activated
protein kinase activation and cell death in human coronary artery endothelial cells. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 160, 688–700.
Rajesh, M., Pan, H., Mukhopadhyay, P., et al. (2007b). Cannabinoid-2 receptor agonist HU-308 protects
against hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury by attenuating oxidative stress, inflammatory response, and
apoptosis. Journal of Leukocyte Biology, 82, 1382–1389.
Ramirez, S.H., Reichenbach, N.L., Fan, S., et al. (2013). Attenuation of HIV-1 replication in macrophages
by cannabinoid receptor 2 agonists. Journal of Leukocyte Biology, 93, 801–810.
Riedel, G., Fadda, P., McKillop-Smith, S., et al. (2009). Synthetic and plant-derived cannabinoid receptor
antagonists show hypophagic properties in fasted and non-fasted mice. British Journal of Pharmacology,
156, 1154–1166.
Ruiz-Valdepenas, L., Martinez-Orgado, J.A., Benito, C., et al. (2011). Cannabidiol reduces lipopolysaccharideinduced vascular changes and inflammation in the mouse brain: an intravital microscopy study. Journal of
Neuroinflammation, 8, 1–9.
Schmid, K., Schonlebe, J., Drexler, H., and Mueck-Weymann, M. (2010). The effects of cannabis on heart
rate variability and well-being in young men. Pharmacopsychiatry, 43, 147–150.

Cardiovascular, Metabolic, Liver, Kidney, and Inflammatory Disorders

Silvestri, C. and Di Marzo, V. (2013). The endocannabinoid system in energy homeostasis and the etiopathology of metabolic disorders. Cell Metabolism, 17, 475–490.
Singla, S., Sachdeva, R., and Mehta, J.L. (2012). Cannabinoids and atherosclerotic coronary heart disease.
Clinical Cardiology, 35, 329–335.
Slavic, S., Lauer, D., Sommerfeld, M., et al. (2013). Cannabinoid receptor 1 inhibition improves cardiac
function and remodelling after myocardial infarction and in experimental metabolic syndrome. Journal
of Molecular Medicine (Berlin), 91, 811–823.
Stanley, C.P., Hind, W.H., and O’Sullivan, S.E. (2013). Is the cardiovascular system a therapeutic target for
cannabidiol? British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 75, 313–322.
Steffens, S. and Pacher, P. (2012). Targeting cannabinoid receptor CB2 in cardiovascular disorders: promises and controversies. British Journal of Pharmacology, 167, 313–323.
Sugamura, K., Sugiyama, S., Nozaki, T., et al. (2009). Activated endocannabinoid system in coronary
artery disease and antiinflammatory effects of cannabinoid 1 receptor blockade on macrophages.
Circulation, 119, 28–36.
Tam, J., Cinar, R., Liu, J., et al. (2012). Peripheral cannabinoid-1 receptor inverse agonism reduces obesity
by reversing leptin resistance. Cell Metabolism, 16, 167–179.
Tam, J., Liu, J., Mukhopadhyay, B., Cinar, R., Godlewski, G., and Kunos, G. (2011). Endocannabinoids in
liver disease. Hepatology, 53, 346–355.
Tam, J., Vemuri, V.K., Liu, J., et al. (2010). Peripheral CB1 cannabinoid receptor blockade improves cardiometabolic risk in mouse models of obesity. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 120, 2953–2966.
Thomas, A., Baillie, G.L., Phillips, A.M., Razdan, R.K., Ross, R.A., and Pertwee, R.G. (2007). Cannabidiol
displays unexpectedly high potency as an antagonist of CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists in vitro. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 613–623.
Waldman, M., Hochhauser, E., Fishbein, M., Aravot, D., Shainberg, A., and Sarne, Y. (2013). An ultralow dose of tetrahydrocannabinol provides cardioprotection. Biochemical Pharmacology, 85, 1626–1633.
Walsh, S.K., Hepburn, C.Y., Kane, K.A., and Wainwright, C.L. (2010). Acute administration of cannabidiol in vivo suppresses ischaemia-induced cardiac arrhythmias and reduces infarct size when given at
reperfusion. British Journal of Pharmacology, 160, 1234–1242.
Wargent, E.T., Zaibi, M.S., Silvestri, C., et al. (2013). The cannabinoid Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin
(THCV) ameliorates insulin sensitivity in two mouse models of obesity. Nutrition & Diabetes, 3, e68.
Weiss, L., Zeira, M., Reich, S., et al. (2006). Cannabidiol lowers incidence of diabetes in non-obese diabetic
mice. Autoimmunity, 39, 143–151.
Weiss, L., Zeira, M., Reich, S., et al. (2008). Cannabidiol arrests onset of autoimmune diabetes in NOD
mice. Neuropharmacology, 54, 244–249.
Wong, A., Gunasekaran, N., Hancock, D.P., et al. (2012). The major plant-derived cannabinoid Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol promotes hypertrophy and macrophage infiltration in adipose tissue. Hormone
Metabolism Research, 44, 105–113.
Zsengeller, Z.K., Ellezian, L., Brown, D., et al. (2012). Cisplatin nephrotoxicity involves mitochondrial
injury with impaired tubular mitochondrial enzyme activity. Journal of Histochemistry Cytochemistry,
60, 521–529.

581

Chapter 32

Phytocannabinoids and Skin Disorders
Sergio Oddi and Mauro Maccarrone

“Quid me mihi detrahis?” inquit.
“A piget, a! non est” clamabat “tibia tanti!”
(“Why do you peel me from myself?”, he cried.
“Oh, I repent! Oh, a flute is not worth such price!”)

Publius Ovidius Naso, Metamorphoses, VI 385–386

32.1 Introduction
The endocannabinoid system (ECS) refers to a group of bioactive lipids, called endocannabinoids (eCBs), and their receptors that are widely expressed throughout the body and appear to
be involved in the regulation of nearly all physiological functions. Indeed, the activation of this
autocrine/paracrine signaling system by delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and other phytocannabinoids, as well as by synthetic cannabinoids and eCBs, exerts numerous pharmacological
actions, including antiemetic, analgesic, anxiolytic, antidepressant, anti-inflammatory, and antineoplastic effects (Pacher et al. 2006), to mention just a few.
In recent years, the presence of a full and functional ECS in the skin and in its adnexal structures (e.g., hair follicle, sebaceous and sweat glands) has been ascertained. Substantial evidence
has been also accumulated indicating a local regulatory role of the ECS in skin physiology, including the formation of the epidermal barrier, and the regulation of melanogenesis, sebum production, and of a variety of immune responses (Biro et al. 2009). In addition, therapeutic efficacy of
targeting the cutaneous ECS is beginning to be documented in several dermatological conditions,
thus opening a promising new front in the field of cannabis pharmacology (Biro et al. 2009;
Kupczyk et al. 2009; Pasquariello et al. 2009).
This chapter describes the expression and regulation of the ECS in skin cells, and its regulatory
role under physiological and pathological conditions. Further, evidence indicating that targeted
manipulation of ECS signaling by cannabis medicines may represent a valuable strategy for a
broad variety of skin disorders is also discussed.

32.2 Biology of the skin
32.2.1 Anatomy and histology of the skin

The skin, or the integument, is one of the largest organs, with a surface area of about 1.8 m2 and
accounts for approximately 7% of total body weight in the average adult. The skin consists of

Phytocannabinoids and Skin Disorders

Fig. 32.1 (See also colour plate section.) Schematic representation of the skin. See text for details.

two main tissues, the epidermis and the dermis, separated by a thin sheet of fibers called the basement membrane (Fig. 32.1). Each of these layers is made of different tissues and has very different
functions.
32.2.1.1 Epidermis

The epidermis is the outer layer of the skin, serving as the physical and chemical barrier between
the interior body and the exterior environment. The epidermis is a multistratified squamous epithelium that is generated by specialized epithelial cells, the keratinocytes, through a tightly regulated differentiation process, called epidermal terminal differentiation or cornification (Fuchs 1990).
Topologically, the epidermis is divided into four layers, or strata, which represent the main
differentiative stages of the keratinocyte: (1) the stratum germinativum or basal layer, (2) the
stratum spinosum, (3) the stratum granolosum, and (4) the stratum corneum (Fig. 32.2). The
innermost layer of cuboidal cells, the basal layer, represents the proliferative compartment for
generation and continuous renewal of the tissue. On detachment from the basement membrane,
newborn keratinocytes migrate outward through successive stages of differentiation, represented
by the spinous and granular layers, toward the terminal differentiation on the surface, the stratum
corneum, where they are transformed into flattened, enucleated squames, termed corneocytes.
The latter cells are sloughed from the surface, and continually replaced by inner cells (Fig. 32.2).

583

584

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Fig. 32.2 Schematic representation showing a section of epidermis with epidermal layers labelled
with different colors. During epidermal differentiation, basal keratinocytes detach from the basement membrane (BM) and start the process of keratinocyte cornification. As cells differentiate, they
move up to form the different layers of the epidermis, as depicted in the right side of the figure.
See text for details.

In addition to keratinocytes, the epidermis has three other cell types: melanocytes that produce
a pigment called melanin, which colors the skin, and protects it against the damaging effects of
solar radiation; Merkel cells that provide sensory information; and Langerhans cells that are a
specialized subset of dendritic cells serving as the first line of defense against pathogens invading
the skin.
32.2.1.2 Dermis

The innermost and much thicker of the two skin layers, the dermis, is a sensitive connective tissue
containing most of the skin’s specialized cells and structures, including nerve endings, hair roots,
sweat and sebaceous glands, and blood and lymph vessels (Fig. 32.1). Therefore, most of the skin
functions, such as sensory perception, immunologic surveillance, and thermoregulation, are carried out by dermis. The latter is also responsible for the mechanical properties and the trophic
support of the skin.
Anatomically, the dermis is divided into two layers: the papillary region and the reticular dermis. The papillary region consists of finger-like projections just beneath the basement membrane
of the epidermis. In this portion, the collagen fibers, that represent the more important structural
components of the dermis, form a loose three-dimensional network that contains terminal portions of blood capillaries, free nerve endings, and tactile Meissner’s corpuscles (Fig. 32.1). The
reticular dermis is composed of a much denser network of thick collagenous, elastic, and reticular
fibers. These fibrillar components, interdispersed in an amorphous ground substance, give the
dermis its mechanical properties. Also located within the reticular region are the roots of the hair,
sebaceous glands, arrectores pilorum muscles, nerve endings, and several specialized sensory
receptors (Fig. 32.1).

Phytocannabinoids and Skin Disorders

Dermal fibroblasts are the major cell type in dermis and produce and organize the extracellular
matrix of the tissue. In addition, they are involved in the production of growth factors/cytokines
and in inﬂammatory responses. Other cellular populations of the dermis include smooth muscle
cells, vascular and lymphatic endothelial cells, and various cells of hematopoietic origin. These
include a constitutive population of dendritic cells and a more heterogeneous population of leukocytes, comprising mast cells, monocytes/macrophages, neutrophils, and lymphocytes.
32.2.2 Physiology of the skin

Placed at the interface between the organism and its environment, the skin is primarily a dynamic
barrier against injuries, infections, water loss, and ultraviolet radiation. Further, the skin carries
out important sensory functions and contributes to the homeostasis of the body, taking a crucial
part in thermoregulation, hydrosaline balance, and metabolism of certain hormones and vitamins
(Chu 2012).
The barrier function of the skin is mainly established through the hydrolipidic film into the
top layers of the stratum corneum of the epidermis, that ensures a defense against microbial and
chemical agents and prevents an excessive dehydration. The network of collagen and elastin fibers
produced by the fibroblasts in the dermis, the dermo-epidermal junction (basement membrane),
and the system of intercellular connections in the epidermis confer to the skin its mechanical
properties of strength, extensibility, and elasticity that enable it to resist mechanical injuries. The
skin immune cells (primarily Langerhans cells, dermal dendritic cells, mast cells, macrophages,
and T-cell subpopulations) are involved in the local defense against chemical and/or biological
insults. Finally, the melanocytes protect the skin against the damaging effects of solar ultraviolet
radiation.
Through its abundant innervation, the skin is the largest sense organ in the body, that mediates
the sensory perception of touch, pressure, vibration, temperature, pain, and itch associated with
skin disorders. The ability of this organ to regulate body temperature depends on the presence of
dermal blood vessels that, together with their arteriovenous anastomoses, are also involved in the
regulation of blood pressure. Finally, the skin serves as a metabolic regulator that transforms various hormones and inactivates potentially harmful substances of exogenous or endogenous origin.

32.3 Expression of the endocannabinoid system in the skin
The biological and pharmacological effects of phytocannabinoids and their synthetic analogs are
primarily attributable to their modulatory activities toward the so-called ECS (Russo 2011). This
signaling system consists of at least two receptors, the G-protein coupled cannabinoid receptors 1
and 2 (CB1 and CB2), their endogenous ligands, the eCBs, along with their transport proteins and
metabolic enzymes (De Petrocellis and Di Marzo 2009).
Arachidonoylethanolamide (AEA) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), the most prominent
eCBs, are generally considered to be produced “on demand” in response to stressful stimuli from
cell membrane components. Yet, recent evidence points toward a key role of intracellular transporters and storage organelles in controlling eCB tone (Maccarrone et al. 2010). Because of their
high lipophilicity, the signaling activity of eCBs is short-lasting and limited to those cells or tissues
that are subjected to stress or damage. In addition, other lipid mediators have been discovered,
of which the most relevant is the antiproliferative N-palmitoylethanolamine (PEA). PEA is not
considered an eCB, but rather an “eCB-like” compound, since it does not activate cannabinoid
receptors, but is able to potentiate the activity of AEA or 2-AG by influencing their transport and
degradation (De Petrocellis and Di Marzo 2009).

585

586

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

32.3.1 CB1 and CB2 receptors

Immunohistological investigations of the precise localization of CB1 and CB2 receptors in sections of human and rodent skin revealed their presence in virtually all the skin cell populations.
In particular, both receptors were observed in epidermal keratinocytes, cutaneous nerve fibers,
dermal cells, and specialized cells with adnexal structures (Table 32.1) (Casanova et al. 2003;
Ibrahim et al. 2005; Stander et al. 2005). Interestingly, in one of these immunohistochemical studies on human skin, CB1 and CB2 were found to be distributed in a complementary fashion, in
epidermis, hair follicle, and sebaceous gland, with CB1 and CB2 being predominantly expressed

Table 32.1 Expression of the ECS in the skin
ECS
member

Epidermis

Dermis

Nerve fibers

Adnexal structures

CB1

Suprabasal
keratinocytes;
primary
melanocytes

Fibroblasts; mast
cells, macrophages

Single epidermal
nerve ﬁbers, small
unmyelinated
subepidermal nerves,
large dermal
myelinated nerves

Differentiated sebocytes,
differentiated epithelial
cells of the infundibulum
and inner root sheath of hair
follicles, myoepithelial cells
of eccrine sweat glands,
sweat gland duct

CB2

Basal
keratynocytes;
primary
melanocytes

Fibroblasts, mast
Single epidermal
cells; vascular smooth nerve ﬁbers, small
muscle cells
unmyelinated
subepidermal nerves,
large dermal
myelinated nerves

Undifferentiated sebocytes,
undifferentiated infundibular
hair follicle cells, myoepithelial
cells of eccrine sweat glands,
sweat gland duct, mast cells,
macrophages

AEA

Primary
Macrophages
keratinocytes
and melanocytes

Human sebocytes SZ95

2-AG

Primary
Macrophages
keratinocytes
and melanocytes

Human sebocytes SZ95

PEA

Primary
keratinocytes
and melanocytes

NAPE-PLD Keratinocytes;
melanocytes

Primary fibroblasts

FAAH

Keratinocytes;
melanocytes

Primary fibroblasts

MAGL

Primary
Primary fibroblasts
keratinocytes
and melanocytes

Human sebocytes SZ95

DAGL

Primary
Primary fibroblasts
keratinocytes
and melanocytes

Human sebocytes SZ95

For acronyms, see the list of abbreviations at the beginning of the chapter.

Phytocannabinoids and Skin Disorders

in differentiated and undifferentiated cells, respectively, suggesting that the two receptors play
nonredundant roles during differentiation of keratinocytes and sebocytes. In rat skin, CB2 immunolabeling was found beyond the basal layer, but fairly uniformly distributed throughout the
epidermis (Ibrahim et al. 2005).
In the dermis, abundant labeling for CB1 and CB2 was identiﬁed on the myoepithelial cells
of the secretory portion of eccrine sweat glands, but not in secretory cells (Stander et al. 2005).
Positive immunoreactivity for CB1 and CB2 was also found in mast cells and in most but not all
CD68-positive macrophages (Stander et al. 2005; Sugawara et al. 2012). In mouse skin, positive staining of CB2 was detected in myofibroblasts and vascular smooth muscle cells (Zheng
et al. 2012). Concerning their localization on human primary sensory nerves, CB1 and CB2 were
identiﬁed on large (myelinated) and thin (unmyelinated) calcitonin gene-related peptide positive
nerve ﬁbers (Stander et al. 2005). The available data concerning the expression of cannabinoid
receptors in the skin are summarized in Table 32.1.
Additionally, these receptors were found to be expressed in cultured melanocytes (Magina
et al. 2011; Pucci et al. 2012), fibroblasts (McPartland 2008), and sweat gland epithelial cells
(Czifra et al. 2012).
32.3.2 Enzymes

The expression and/or activity of the main AEA-metabolizing enzymes (i.e., fatty acid amide
hydrolase, FAAH, and N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase D, NAPE-PLD) have
been documented for rodent skin (Karsak et al. 2007; Khasabova et al. 2012; Petrosino et al. 2010)
(Table 32.1). On the other hand, the presence in the skin of the main enzymes involved in 2-AG
biosynthesis and metabolism (i.e., diacylglycerol lipase, DAGL, and monoacylglycerol lipase,
MAGL, respectively) is not yet well characterized, and has only been assessed in cultured keratinocytes (Berdyshev et al. 2000; Maccarrone et al. 2003; Oddi et al. 2005), melanocytes (Hamtiaux
et al. 2012; Pucci et al. 2012), sebocytes (Dobrosi et al. 2008), and fibroblasts (McPartland 2008).
32.3.3 Endocannabinoids

The levels of the main eCBs (AEA and 2-AG) and of PEA have been measured in rodent paw skin
by several laboratories (Calignano et al. 1998; Felder et al. 1996; Khasabova et al. 2008, 2011, 2012;
Maione et al. 2007), and results are summarized in Table 32.2.
In vitro studies ascertained that different skin cell populations, including keratinocytes
(Maccarrone et al. 2003; Magina et al. 2011; Toth et al. 2011), sebocytes (Dobrosi et al. 2008),

Table 32.2 Levels of AEA, 2-AG, and PEA in paw skin from mice or rats
Compound
Tissue

AEA (pmol/g
tissue)

2-AG (nmol/g
tissue)

PEA (pmol/g
tissue)

Reference

Rat paw skin

49 ± 9
30 ± 9
143 ± 14

6.10 ± 0.08

692 ± 119
750 ± 100

Calignano et al. 1998
Felder et al. 1996
Maione et al. 2007

Mouse paw skin

34.9 ± 2.6
176 ± 35

1.60 ± 0.25
4.1 ± 0.6

790 ± 89
130 ± 20

Khasabova et al. 2012
Maione et al. 2007

Values are expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean.

587

588

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

melanocytes (Pucci et al. 2012), sweat gland epithelial cells (Czifra et al. 2012), and macrophages
(Jiang et al. 2009), synthesize and release eCBs under basal and stimulated conditions.

32.4 Role of the endocannabinoid system in skin physiology
32.4.1 Biological activities of the endocannabinoid system in skin cells

Alterations in eCB levels were observed in a variety of physiological and pathophysiological conditions of the skin. For example, ultraviolet B exposure increased the levels of AEA in cultured
keratinocytes, suggesting that this eCB is involved in cellular responses to stress (Berdyshev et al.
2000; Magina et al. 2011). Instead, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate and calcium, two wellestablished inducers of keratinocyte differentiation, markedly reduced the endogenous level of
AEA, due to its enhanced degradation by FAAH (Maccarrone et al. 2003; Oddi et al. 2005).
Generally, a strong elevation of eCB levels in the skin was found to follow the application of
irritant and inflammatory stimuli (Costa et al. 2010; Karsak et al. 2007; Maione et al. 2007; Oka
et al. 2006; Petrosino et al. 2010). These changes are thought to represent an adaptive response
aimed at reducing pain and inflammation (Di Marzo 2008). Indeed, genetic or pharmacological
inactivation of eCB degradative enzymes usually counteracts pain and inflammation (Petrosino
and Di Marzo 2010). However, emerging evidence suggests that AEA and 2-AG, as well as CB1
and CB2 receptors, may have different, sometimes even opposing, role(s) in many inflammatory
conditions, with AEA and CB1 playing immunosuppressive roles, and 2-AG and CB2 acting as
both pro- and anti-inflammatory mediators (Di Marzo and Petrosino 2007).
Growing evidence supports a functional role of eCB signaling in skin cells. For example, AEA
inhibited the formation of cornified envelope, a hallmark of terminal keratinocyte differentiation, through a CB1-dependent reduction of transglutaminase and protein kinase C activities
(Maccarrone et al. 2003), suggesting an important role of eCB signaling in epidermal differentiation. This antidifferentiative action of AEA was found to be associated with the silencing of
genes involved in keratinocyte differentiation (i.e., keratin 1, keratin 10, involucrin, and transglutaminase 5) by selective DNA methylation of their promoters (Paradisi et al. 2008). On the
other hand, in hair follicles it was demonstrated that CB1 activation by AEA inhibited hair shaft
elongation and the proliferation of hair matrix keratinocytes, and also induced intraepithelial
apoptosis and premature hair follicle regression (Telek et al. 2007). Interestingly, these cells failed
to respond to 2-AG stimulation, highlighting the nonredundancy of these two prototypic eCBs
(Telek et al. 2007). Consistent with an inhibitory role of AEA in keratinocyte growth, CB1 activation by AEA was found to markedly suppress proliferation and induce cell death in both human
cultured keratinocytes and skin organ-culture models (Toth et al. 2011), most probably due to
an elevation of intracellular Ca2+ concentration via the transient receptor potential vanilloid type
1 (TRPV1). The latter is one of the most prominent members of the TRP family of ion channels
that is now established as an important target for phytocannabinoids (Costa et al. 2004b; De
Petrocellis et al. 2011).
In human sebocytes, AEA stimulated lipid production at low concentrations, but induced apoptosis at higher levels, in a CB2-mediated manner (Dobrosi et al. 2008). A similar biphasic behavior
of AEA was observed also in human melanocytes, where AEA had melanogenic, mitogenic, and
dendritogenic effects at low doses (via CB1) and proapoptotic effects at higher doses (via TRPV1)
(Pucci et al. 2012). Finally, in human eccrine sweat gland epithelial cells both AEA and 2-AG
suppressed proliferation, induced apoptosis, altered expression of various structural proteins (i.e.,
involucrin, filaggrin, loricrin, and keratins), and upregulated lipid synthesis; remarkably, all these
effects were CB1-, CB2-, and TRPV1-independent (Czifra et al. 2012).

Phytocannabinoids and Skin Disorders

32.4.2 Role of cannabinoid receptors in the epidermal barrier

Important information on the role of the cannabinoid receptors in skin biology has been recently
obtained from knockout mice. Previous experiments have shown that CB1 and CB2 deficient
mice, as well as CB1−/−/CB2−/− double knockout mice, do not display any obvious skin maturation
defect. However, a more focused study on the role of cannabinoid receptors in mouse epidermis
has recently revealed that these two receptors operate in an opposite manner to regulate epidermal
structure and function (Roelandt et al. 2012). In particular, targeted disruption of CB1 receptors
caused the formation of a thicker epidermis with an increased rate of keratinocyte proliferation,
accompanied by a reduced expression of some relevant markers of keratinocyte differentiation
(i.e., involucrin, loricrin, and filaggrin, caspase 14 activation), as well as by altered lipid bilayer
structures (Roelandt et al. 2012). Conversely, the absence of CB2 led to the formation of a thinner epidermis with reduced proliferative rates of keratinocytes, paralleled by a strong expression
of the main epidermal differentiation markers (Roelandt et al. 2012). Moreover, functional data
provided from these mouse models demonstrated that the recovery of the permeability barrier
function of the epidermis following acute removal of corneocytes from the stratum corneum was
impaired in CB1−/−, whilst it was enhanced in CB2−/− mice. These findings strongly suggest that
CB1 signaling is a positive regulator, whereas CB2 signaling is a negative regulator, of epidermal
differentiation.
32.4.3 Role of cannabinoid receptors in peripheral analgesia

Both cannabinoid receptors have been found to inhibit pain responses in models of acute, inflammatory, and neuropathic pain by acting at peripheral sites (Bridges et al. 2001; Ellington et al.
2002; Malan et al. 2002; Richardson et al. 1998; Rukwied et al. 2003). By using transgenic mice
selectively lacking CB1 in nociceptors innervating the skin, Agarwal et al. (2007) demonstrated a
critical role for CB1 expressed by skin primary sensory neurons in the tonic inhibition of pain by
eCBs, as well as in exogenous cannabinoid-induced analgesia for chronic inflammatory and neuropathic pain (Agarwal et al. 2007). For CB2-mediated antinociceptive effects, an indirect mechanism has been identified. Indeed, peripherally administered CB2 agonists caused the release from
skin keratinocytes of the endogenous opioid β-endorphin, which then acts at μ-opioid receptors
on primary afferent neurons to inhibit nociception (Ibrahim et al. 2005).

32.5 Phytocannabinoids and skin pathophysiology
32.5.1 Psoriasis

Psoriasis is one of the most common inflammatory skin disorders, characterized by well-demarcated erythematous, scaly plaques appearing on the surface of the epidermis. The hallmarks of
psoriasis are abnormal differentiation and hyperproliferation of keratinocytes, accompanied by
an excessive inflammatory response, mainly triggered by T-helper 1 (Th1) cells (Krueger and
Bowcock 2005).
In view of their prodifferentiating, antiproliferative, and immunomodulatory effects, phytocannabinoids could be useful for the development of topical therapy for psoriasis. Indeed, phytocannabinoids (THC, cannabinol (CBN), cannabidiol (CBD), and cannabigerol (CBG)), as well as
synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists (JWH-015, BML-190, and HU-210), inhibited growth of
a hyperproliferating human keratinocyte cell line (HPV-16) and human epidermal keratinocytes
(Wilkinson and Williamson 2007) (Table 32.3). Other investigations demonstrated that cannabinoids inhibit proliferation of epidermal (Ibrahim et al. 2005; Paradisi et al. 2008; Toth et al.

589

590

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Table 32.3 Emerging functions of phytocannabinoids in cutaneous biology
Phytocannabinoid

OH

O
Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)

OH

OH
Cannabidiol (CBD)

OH

HO

Biological or pharmacological effects

Reference

Antipruritic effects in patients with
chronic cholestatic liver disease

Neff et al. 2002

Vasorelaxation in isolated blood vessels

O’Sullivan et al. 2005

Inhibits carrageenan-induced edema
in rats

Sofia et al. 1973

Inhibits croton oil-induced edema
in mice

Tubaro et al. 2010

Attenuates allergic contact dermatitis
in mice

Karsak et al. 2007

Inhibits keratinocyte proliferation
in vitro

Wilkinson and
Williamson 2007

Antitumoral effects in vitro (melanoma
and squamous cell carcinoma cells)

Blazquez et al. 2006;
Hart et al. 2004

Inhibits TPA-induced erythema in mice

Formukong et al. 1988

Inhibits keratinocyte proliferation
in vitro

Wilkinson and
Williamson 2007

Inhibits croton oil-induced ear edema
in mice

Tubaro et al. 2010

Inhibits carrageenan-induced edema in
mice and rats

Costa et al. 2004a;
Lodzki et al. 2003

Inhibits collagen-induced inflammation
in mice

Malfait et al. 2000

Inhibits keratinocyte proliferation
in vitro

Wilkinson and
Williamson 2007

Antitumoral effects in vitro (human
oral epitheliod carcinoma cell lines)

Baek et al. 1998

Inhibits keratinocyte proliferation
in vitro

Wilkinson and
Williamson 2007

Inhibits carrageenan-induced edema
in rats

Turner and Elsohly 1981

Cannabigerol (CBG)

OH
H

O
Cannabinol (CBN)
OH

O
Cannabichromene (CBC)

Phytocannabinoids and Skin Disorders

2011) and hair matrix keratinocytes (Telek et al. 2007), and induced intraepithelial apoptosis and
premature regression of hair follicles (Telek et al. 2007; Toth et al. 2011).
With respect to their immunomodulatory properties, several studies showed that cannabinoids
suppress the production of proinflammatory cytokines (Klein 2005). For example, the use of cannabis was associated with a decrease of proinflammatory Th1 cytokines, such as interferon-γ and
interleukin (IL)-2, and an increase in anti-inflammatory Th2 cytokines, such as IL-4 and IL-10
(Pacifici et al. 2003). Consistently, THC exposure suppressed the cell-mediated Th1 response
(reducing the release of IL-2, tumor necrosis factor-α, interferon-γ) and simultaneously enhanced
Th2-associated cytokines (such as IL-4) in mice infected with Legionella pneumophila (Klein
et al. 2000; Newton et al. 1994). In addition, THC showed an impressive anti-inflammatory activity in the carrageenan-induced paw edema model in rats (Sofia et al. 1973), and was also active
topically in the croton oil-induced ear edema model in mice (Tubaro et al. 2010). Interestingly, as
well, the nonpsychotropic cannabinoids, CBD (Costa et al. 2004a; Formukong et al. 1988; Tubaro
et al. 2010) and cannabichromene (CBC) (Turner and Elsohly 1981; Wirth et al. 1980) displayed a
striking potency in in vivo assays of inhibition of inflammatory responses, despite their negligible
activity as ligands of cannabinoid receptors (Stern and Lambert 2007) (Table 32.3).
Although direct studies using preclinical models of psoriasis have not yet been conducted, the
antiproliferative effects of cannabinoids and AEA on keratinocytes and the earlier mentioned
roles of CB1 and CB2 in epidermal biology, suggest that the ECS could be involved in the etiology
of psoriasis.
32.5.2 Skin tumors

Skin cancers are one of the most common malignancies in humans. There are two main types of
malignant skin tumors, namely carcinomas derived from epidermal cell lineage, and melanomas
derived from melanocytes.
32.5.2.1 Melanoma

Melanoma is the least common but most dangerous form of skin cancer because of its chemoresistance and propensity to metastasis. Many patients with melanoma experience loss of appetite
and nausea unresponsive to conventional antiemetics. THC has been successfully used as a palliative therapy in patients with malignant melanoma, preventing chemotherapy-induced nausea
and vomiting, stimulating appetite, and alleviating cancer-associated pain (Gonzalez-Rosales and
Walsh 1997; Zutt et al. 2006).
In the last years, emerging evidence has been obtained that suggests that phyto-, endo-, and
synthetic cannabinoids could be useful in the treatment of cancer due to their ability to regulate
signaling pathways that are involved in the control of basic cell functions, such as the balance
between cell death and survival (Guzman 2003). Specifically, it has been found that human melanoma cells express functional cannabinoid receptors (Blazquez et al. 2006; Magina et al. 2011;
Scuderi et al. 2011). Blazquez et al. (2006) found that cannabinoid receptor agonists decreased
growth, proliferation, angiogenesis, and metastasis of human melanoma both in vitro and in vivo,
thus revealing the potential benefits of the ECS in the treatment of this type of cancer (Blazquez
et al. 2006).
The mechanisms whereby cannabinoids exerted such antimelanoma effects are currently
unclear. On the one hand, it has been suggested that cannabinoids (THC, WIN 55,212-2, JWH133) act on melanoma cells to arrest the cell cycle at the G1–S transition stage via cannabinoid
receptor-dependent stimulation of the prosurvival protein Akt and hypophosphorylation of the

591

592

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

retinoblastoma protein tumor suppressor (Blazquez et al. 2006). In another study, the antimitogenic effects of WIN 55,212-2 on human melanoma cells were exerted independently of cannabinoid or vanilloid receptors, but required lipid raft integrity and were mediated by caspase
activation and phosphorylation of extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (Scuderi et al. 2011). Also
in line with a possible involvement of nonCB1/2 receptors in the antiproliferative action of cannabinoids, PEA used in association with the FAAH inhibitor URB597 considerably reduced cell
viability of mouse melanoma cells, both in vitro and in vivo (Hamtiaux et al. 2012).
32.5.2.2 Skin carcinomas

Nonmelanomas are named after the type of epidermal cell from which they arise: basal cell carcinomas which originate from the basal layer of the epidermis, and squamous cell carcinomas
which derive from, or are composed of, all epidermal layers. CB1 and CB2 receptors have been
shown to be expressed in both basal cell carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas in mouse and
humans (Casanova et al. 2003; Zhao et al. 2010).
Local treatment with the mixed CB1/CB2 agonist WIN 55,212-2 or the selective CB2 agonist
JWH-133 inhibited the growth of malignant tumors generated by inoculation of epidermal tumor
cells into nude mice (Casanova et al. 2003). Both cannabinoids induced apoptosis of nonmelanoma tumor cells and inhibition of tumor angiogenesis (Casanova et al. 2003). Remarkably, these
antitumoral effects were associated with the abrogation of epidermal growth factor receptor function (Casanova et al. 2003), an important player in the development of nonmelanoma skin cancers
that triggers the angiogenic switch necessary for skin tumor growth (El-Abaseri et al. 2005).
Although CB1 and CB2 receptors are physiologically linked with skin cancer, their functional
role in cancer is not fully understood. On the one hand, the pharmacological stimulation of CB1
and CB2 receptors has been found to induce apoptosis in skin carcinoma and melanoma cells
(Blazquez et al. 2006; Casanova et al. 2003). On the other hand, CB1 and CB2 deficiency has been
shown to suppress skin papilloma formation in a two-stage skin carcinogenesis mouse model,
indicating that CB1 and/or CB2 receptors could have a role in promoting skin tumorigenesis,
possibly by enhancing ultraviolet light-induced inflammation (Zheng et al. 2008). Moreover,
THC treatment displayed a bimodal action on squamous cell carcinoma (SCC-9) growth, with
low concentrations (nM range) being protumoral and high concentrations (μM range) having
antitumoral effects (Hart et al. 2004).
32.5.3 Dermatitis
32.5.3.1 Atopic dermatitis

Atopic dermatitis is a chronic, relapsing inflammatory skin disorder that involves scaly and itchy
rashes. Although the mechanism underlying atopic dermatitis is still elusive, it is believed that this
condition is due to an immediate hypersensitivity reaction, mediated by Th2 cells, in response
to various external factors such as irritants and allergens. Activated T cells stimulate B cells to
produce immunoglobulin E, which, in turn, activates mast cells, producing many inflammatory
and/or pruritogenic mediators, such as histamine, serotonin, proteases, and cytokines (Leung and
Bieber 2003).
Emerging evidence has revealed the ECS as a key player in controlling mast cell biology (De
Filippis et al. 2008; Maccarrone et al. 2000; Sugawara et al. 2012). In fact, natural and synthetic
cannabinoids displayed protective effects both in acute and chronic inflammatory pathologies
sustained by excessive accumulation and degranulation of these immunocompetent cells. More
specifically, the selective CB2 agonist JWH-133 reduced mast cell-dependent edema in mice

Phytocannabinoids and Skin Disorders

(Jonsson et al. 2006). Moreover, the other CB2 selective agonist HU-308 reduced arachidonic
acid-induced edema in mice (Hanus et al. 1999), and both the nonpsychotropic CB2 agonist,
HU-320, and CBD were shown to inhibit murine collagen-induced arthritis (Malfait et al. 2000).
Furthermore, both the CB1-selective agonist arachidonyl-2′-chloroethylamide (ACEA) and the
CB2-selective agonist JWH-015 reduced granuloma formation and related angiogenesis in rats
(De Filippis et al. 2007). Finally, topical application of adelmidrol, a PEA analog, has been shown
to be an effective treatment for atopic dermatitis, by downregulating mast cell activation and the
subsequent inflammatory effects (Cerrato et al. 2010; Pulvirenti et al. 2007).
Pruritus is a major characteristic and one of the most debilitating symptoms in allergic and
atopic diseases, and represents the diagnostic hallmark of atopic dermatitis. Repeated administration of JTE-907, a CB2 receptor inverse agonist, significantly inhibited spontaneous scratching
behavior in a mouse model of atopic dermatitis (Maekawa et al. 2006), suggesting a yet-to-beclarified CB2 involvement in allergic itch.
32.5.3.2 Contact allergic dermatitis

Contact dermatitis is an eczematous skin reaction caused by direct and usually repeated exposure to small allergenic molecules. Immunologically, contact dermatitis is a form of delayed
type hypersensitivity that consists of two phases. In the sensitization phase, which occurs at the
first contact of the skin with the hapten, the resident antigen-presenting cells (i.e., Langerhans
cells and dermal dendritic cells) pick up and process the antigen. Hapten-bearing dendritic cells
migrate to the draining lymph nodes, where the allergen is exposed to T lymphocytes. During the
following stage, the so-called elicitation phase, after a new contact with the same antigen, memory
T cells are activated and exert direct and indirect cytotoxic effects toward cells of the skin, causing
edema, erythema, and induration at the site of contact in sensitized humans or animals.
The involvement of the ECS in contact dermatitis is supported by several studies performed in
different preclinical models of this pathology. During the experimental allergy contact dermatitis
induced by 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB), levels of AEA and 2-AG were found to increase,
and a downregulation of CB1 receptors was observed whereas CB2 receptors were upregulated
(Karsak et al. 2007). Petrosino et al. (2010) found that DNFB increased AEA, 2-AG, and PEA
levels in ear skin, and upregulated TRPV1 and NAPE-PLD in ear keratinocytes (Petrosino et al.
2010). Finally, in another model of contact dermatitis induced by oxazolone an increase of 2-AG,
but not of AEA, was demonstrated (Oka et al. 2006).
Cannabinoids exert an overall antiallergic effect, yet the mechanism of action remains elusive.
Studies with animals genetically devoid of CB1 and CB2 receptors have generated contradictory
findings about the effective contribution of these receptors to allergic dermatitis. On the one
hand, using single and double CB1/CB2 receptor knockout, Karsak et al. (2007) demonstrated
that both receptors exerted a protective role in DNFB-sensitized/challenged mice. In particular,
it has been reported that CB2−/− mice experienced pronounced chronic inflammation that was
alleviated or exacerbated by CB2 agonists or antagonists, respectively (Karsak et al. 2007). On the
other hand, CB2−/− mice were found to exhibit a significant suppression of DNFB-induced edema
and acanthosis (i.e., diffuse epidermal hyperplasia), and, consistently, a CB2-selective antagonist
was found to alleviate chronic inflammation induced by DNFB in wild-type mice (Mimura et al.
2012; Ueda et al. 2005). Moreover, a CB2-selective agonist induced ear swelling in wild-type mice
(Ueda et al. 2007), suggesting that the CB2 receptor plays a stimulatory role in the sensitization
and exacerbation of allergic inflammation. A possible explanation for these conflicting results
could reside in the different doses of DNFB used to induce a dermal reaction. However, in other
contact dermatitis models, in which ovalbumin or oxazolone were repeatedly applied, there was a

593

594

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

significant decrease in ear swelling and acanthosis in CB2−/− mice compared with wild-type animals, strongly supporting the notion that CB2 and its endogenous ligand 2-AG enhance dermal
reactions to allergens (Mimura et al. 2012). Recently, Petrosino et al. (2010) found that systemic
administration of PEA markedly inhibited DNFB-induced ear inflammation, in a manner that
could be attenuated by TRPV1 antagonism, indicating that also the latter receptor is a valuable
target for treating contact allergic dermatitis (Petrosino et al. 2010).
Notably, THC and CBN were found to be strong sensitizers in an animal model of contact
allergic dermatitis (Watson et al. 1983), suggesting that phytocannabinoids could act as allergens
and cause allergic reactions.
32.5.4 Scleroderma

Systemic sclerosis (or scleroderma) is a heterogeneous disorder which affects the dermis, as well
as the connective tissue of a variety of internal organs (LeRoy and Medsger 2001). Early stages
of scleroderma are characterized by an infiltration of affected skin by inflammatory cells, mostly
macrophages and activated T cells. Later stages of the disease are characterized by an excessive
collagen synthesis and deposition by fibroblasts, resulting in pathologic organ fibrosis.
Systemic sclerosis represents an example of how CB1 and CB2 receptors, activated by elevated
eCB levels (Palumbo-Zerr et al. 2012), can be detrimental and beneficial, respectively, under pathological conditions. Indeed, CB1−/− mice, or controls treated with CB1 antagonists, were protected
from bleomycin-induced skin fibrosis, exhibiting a reduced dermal thickening, associated with a
decreased number of myofibroblasts, infiltrating T cells, and macrophages (Marquart et al. 2010).
In marked contrast, CB2−/− mice, or controls treated with CB2 antagonists, were more susceptible
to the same model of scleroderma, with clinical symptoms markedly worsened (Akhmetshina
et al. 2009). Similarly, CB2−/− mice were shown to develop a more exacerbated hypochloriteinduced fibrosis compared with wild-type animals (Servettaz et al. 2010). Experiments involving
bone marrow transplantation revealed that these two receptors indirectly regulate the activation
of fibroblasts by orchestrating the infiltration of leukocytes into lesional skin (Marquart et al.
2010; Servettaz et al. 2010). Finally, Palumbo-Zerr et al. (2012) found that the inhibition of CB1
completely abrograted the profibrotic effects of FAAH inactivation, whereas the inhibition of CB2
only modestly enhanced fibrosis, suggesting that CB1 is the predominant receptor for eCBs in
skin fibrosis, and that AEA exerts antifibrogenic activity (Palumbo-Zerr et al. 2012).
Notably, the profibrogenic and antifibrotic effects mediated by CB1 and CB2 receptors, respectively, were not restricted to the skin, but were also observed under other fibrotic conditions
affecting liver and pancreas (Julien et al. 2005; Michalski et al. 2008; Teixeira-Clerc et al. 2006).
From these preclinical data it is arguable that selective antagonism and agonism of CB1 and CB2
receptors, respectively, may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of early inflammatory
stages of scleroderma.
32.5.5 Acne vulgaris

Acne vulgaris is one of the most common skin disorders, characterized by increased sebum
production and inflammation of the sebaceous glands and hyperkeratinisation of the follicular
epithelium. Acne can be induced and/or aggravated by stress, endocrine conditions (adolescence), immune/inflammatory factors, Propionibacterium acnes infection of the skin, and diet.
Treatments for acne are directed at correcting defects in keratinocyte proliferation, reducing the
bacterial population, decreasing sebaceous gland activity, and limiting the inflammatory process
(Williams et al. 2012).

Phytocannabinoids and Skin Disorders

The role of the ECS in the biology of hair follicle and sebaceous gland biology has only recently
been evaluated. Both human organ-cultured hair follicles and sebaceous gland-derived sebocytes
(SZ95) have been reported to produce AEA and 2-AG (Dobrosi et al. 2008; Telek et al. 2007).
Specifically, in these studies eCBs were shown to stimulate sebocyte lipid synthesis and apoptosis,
hallmarks of sebocyte differentiation, and hence a model of holocrine sebum production, in a CB2
receptor-dependent manner (Dobrosi et al. 2008). Additionally, sebocytes are known to express
TRPV1, a receptor that is activated by AEA and is also involved in sebocyte lipid biosynthesis
(Toth et al. 2011).
These preliminary findings suggest that the ECS may have a regulatory role in sebaceous gland
lipid homeostasis, encouraging the systematic exploration of the question of whether distinct ECS
components can be targeted in the management of acne, as well as of other common skin disorders characterized by sebaceous gland dysfunctions, such as seborrhea, dry skin, and sebaceous
gland-derived tumors.

32.6 Conclusions
Few organs are as large, accessible, multifunctional, and yet underappreciated as the skin. Possibly
for this reason, over the last decades, the therapeutic efficacy of phytocannabinoids in dermatology has been little investigated. However, the recent discovery that virtually all cell populations
in mammalian skin generate endogenous cannabinoids, such as AEA and 2-AG, and use them to
modulate multiple different functions (e.g., epidermal barrier formation, hair growth, melanin,
sebum and sweat production, and dermal fibrogenesis), indicates that the ECS plays important
roles in skin biology and that it is also a potential target for drugs that could be used to treat a
number of skin pathologies, particularly those involving inflammation and hyperproliferation,
such as skin tumors, psoriasis, and dermatitis.
Growing research in this still neglected field has revealed that cutaneously expressed CB1 and
CB2 receptors, and their endogenous ligands AEA and 2-AG, exert divergent, and sometimes
even opposing, effects on skin functions, underlying the complexity of the endocannabinergic
network in the skin. Thus, it is conceivable that, depending on the particular pathological condition, either activation or blockade of cutaneous eCB signaling may have therapeutic potential for
treating skin disorders (Biro et al. 2009).
However, a lot of exciting work remains to be done in order to unravel the multifaceted functions of the ECS in skin biology and pathophysiology, and to establish whether phytocannabinoids are indeed a new valuable generation of dermatological drugs.

References
Agarwal, N., Pacher, P., Tegeder, I., et al. (2007). Cannabinoids mediate analgesia largely via peripheral
type 1 cannabinoid receptors in nociceptors. Nature Neuroscience, 10, 870–879.
Akhmetshina, A., Dees, C., Busch, N., et al. (2009). The cannabinoid receptor CB2 exerts antifibrotic
effects in experimental dermal fibrosis. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 60, 1129–1136.
Baek, S.H., Kim, Y.O., Kwag, J.S., et al. (1998). Boron trifluoride etherate on silica-A modified Lewis
acid reagent (VII). Antitumor activity of cannabigerol against human oral epitheloid carcinoma cells.
Archives of Pharmacal Research, 21, 353–356.
Berdyshev, E.V., Schmid, P.C., Dong, Z., et al. (2000). Stress-induced generation of N-acylethanolamines
in mouse epidermal JB6 P+ cells. Biochemistry Journal, 346(Pt. 2), 369–374.
Biro, T., Toth, B.I., Hasko, G., et al. (2009). The endocannabinoid system of the skin in health and disease:
novel perspectives and therapeutic opportunities. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 30, 411–420.

595

596

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Blazquez, C., Carracedo, A., Barrado, L., et al. (2006). Cannabinoid receptors as novel targets for the treatment of melanoma. FASEB Journal, 20, 2633–2635.
Bridges, D., Ahmad, K., and Rice, A.S. (2001). The synthetic cannabinoid WIN55,212-2 attenuates hyperalgesia and allodynia in a rat model of neuropathic pain. British Journal of Pharmacology, 133, 586–594.
Calignano, A., La Rana, G., Giuffrida, A., et al. (1998). Control of pain initiation by endogenous cannabinoids. Nature, 394, 277–281.
Casanova, M.L., Blazquez, C., Martinez-Palacio, J., et al. (2003). Inhibition of skin tumor growth and
angiogenesis in vivo by activation of cannabinoid receptors. The Journal of Clinical Investigation, 111,
43–50.
Cerrato, S., Brazis, P., della Valle, M.F., et al. (2010). Effects of palmitoylethanolamide on immunologically induced histamine, PGD2 and TNFalpha release from canine skin mast cells. Veterinary Immunology
and Immunopathology, 133, 9–15.
Chu, D.H. (2012). Development and structure of skin. In: L.A. Goldsmith, S.I. Katz, B.A. Gilchrest, A.S.
Paller, D.J. Leffell, and K. Wolff (eds.). Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. 8th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill, pp. 57–73.
Costa, B., Bettoni, I., Petrosino, S., et al. (2010). The dual fatty acid amide hydrolase/TRPV1 blocker,
N-arachidonoyl-serotonin, relieves carrageenan-induced inflammation and hyperalgesia in mice.
Pharmacological Research, 61, 537–546.
Costa, B., Colleoni, M., Conti, S., et al. (2004a). Oral anti-inflammatory activity of cannabidiol, a nonpsychoactive constituent of cannabis, in acute carrageenan-induced inflammation in the rat paw.
Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Archives of Pharmacology, 369, 294–299.
Costa, B., Giagnoni, G., Franke, C., et al. (2004b). Vanilloid TRPV1 receptor mediates the antihyperalgesic
effect of the nonpsychoactive cannabinoid, cannabidiol, in a rat model of acute inflammation. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 143, 247–250.
Czifra, G., Szollosi, A.G., Toth, B.I., et al. (2012). Endocannabinoids regulate growth and survival of
human eccrine sweat gland-derived epithelial cells. The Journal of Investigative Dermatology, 132,
1967–1976.
De Filippis, D., D’Amico, A., and Iuvone, T. (2008). Cannabinomimetic control of mast cell mediator
release: new perspective in chronic inflammation. Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 20 Suppl 1, 20–25.
De Filippis, D., Russo, A., De Stefano, D., et al. (2007). Local administration of WIN 55,212-2 reduces
chronic granuloma-associated angiogenesis in rat by inhibiting NF-kappaB activation. Journal of
Molecular Medicine, 85, 635–645.
De Petrocellis, L. and Di Marzo, V. (2009). An introduction to the endocannabinoid system: from the early
to the latest concepts. Best Practice & Research. Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 23, 1–15.
De Petrocellis, L., Ligresti, A., Moriello, A.S., et al. (2011). Effects of cannabinoids and cannabinoidenriched Cannabis extracts on TRP channels and endocannabinoid metabolic enzymes. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 163, 1479–1494.
Di Marzo, V. (2008). Targeting the endocannabinoid system: to enhance or reduce? Nature Reviews. Drug
Discovery, 7, 438–455.
Di Marzo, V. and Petrosino, S. (2007). Endocannabinoids and the regulation of their levels in health and
disease. Current Opinion in Lipidology, 18, 129–140.
Dobrosi, N., Toth, B.I., Nagy, G., et al. (2008). Endocannabinoids enhance lipid synthesis and apoptosis of
human sebocytes via cannabinoid receptor-2-mediated signaling. FASEB Journal, 22, 3685–3695.
El-Abaseri, T.B., Fuhrman, J., Trempus, C., et al. (2005). Chemoprevention of UV light-induced skin
tumorigenesis by inhibition of the epidermal growth factor receptor. Cancer Research, 65, 3958–3965.
Ellington, H.C., Cotter, M.A., Cameron, N.E., et al. (2002). The effect of cannabinoids on capsaicinevoked calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) release from the isolated paw skin of diabetic and nondiabetic rats. Neuropharmacology, 42, 966–975.

Phytocannabinoids and Skin Disorders

Felder, C.C., Nielsen, A., Briley, E.M., et al. (1996). Isolation and measurement of the endogenous cannabinoid receptor agonist, anandamide, in brain and peripheral tissues of human and rat. FEBS Letters,
393, 231–235.
Formukong, E.A., Evans, A.T., and Evans, F.J. (1988). Analgesic and antiinflammatory activity of constituents of Cannabis sativa L. Inflammation, 12, 361–371.
Fuchs, E. (1990). Epidermal differentiation. Current Opinion in Cell Biology, 2, 1028–1035.
Gonzalez-Rosales, F. and Walsh, D. (1997). Intractable nausea and vomiting due to gastrointestinal
mucosal metastases relieved by tetrahydrocannabinol (dronabinol). Journal of Pain and Symptom
Management, 14, 311–314.
Guzman, M. (2003). Cannabinoids: potential anticancer agents. Nature Reviews. Cancer, 3, 745–755.
Hamtiaux, L., Masquelier, J., Muccioli, G.G., et al. (2012). The association of N-palmitoylethanolamine
with the FAAH inhibitor URB597 impairs melanoma growth through a supra-additive action. BMC
Cancer, 12, 92.
Hanus, L., Breuer, A., Tchilibon, S., et al. (1999). HU-308: a specific agonist for CB(2), a peripheral cannabinoid receptor. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 96,
14228–14233.
Hart, S., Fischer, O.M., and Ullrich, A. (2004). Cannabinoids induce cancer cell proliferation via tumor
necrosis factor alpha-converting enzyme (TACE/ADAM17)-mediated transactivation of the epidermal
growth factor receptor. Cancer Research, 64, 1943–1950.
Ibrahim, M.M., Porreca, F., Lai, J., et al. (2005). CB2 cannabinoid receptor activation produces antinociception by stimulating peripheral release of endogenous opioids. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 102, 3093–3098.
Jiang, L.S., Pu, J., Han, Z.H., et al. (2009). Role of activated endocannabinoid system in regulation of cellular cholesterol metabolism in macrophages. Cardiovascular Research, 81, 805–813.
Jonsson, K.O., Persson, E., and Fowler, C.J. (2006). The cannabinoid CB2 receptor selective agonist
JWH133 reduces mast cell oedema in response to compound 48/80 in vivo but not the release of betahexosaminidase from skin slices in vitro. Life Sciences, 78, 598–606.
Julien, B., Grenard, P., Teixeira-Clerc, F., et al. (2005). Antifibrogenic role of the cannabinoid receptor
CB2 in the liver. Gastroenterology, 128, 742–755.
Karsak, M., Gaffal, E., Date, R., et al. (2007). Attenuation of allergic contact dermatitis through the endocannabinoid system. Science, 316, 1494–1497.
Khasabova, I.A., Khasabov, S.G., Harding-Rose, C., et al. (2008). A decrease in anandamide signaling contributes to the maintenance of cutaneous mechanical hyperalgesia in a model of bone cancer pain. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 11141–11152.
Khasabova, I.A., Chandiramani, A., Harding-Rose, C., et al. (2011). Increasing 2-arachidonoyl glycerol signaling in the periphery attenuates mechanical hyperalgesia in a model of bone cancer pain.
Pharmacological Research, 64, 60–67.
Khasabova, I.A., Khasabov, S., Paz, J., et al. (2012). Cannabinoid type-1 receptor reduces pain and neurotoxicity produced by chemotherapy. The Journal of Neuroscience, 32, 7091–7101.
Klein, T.W. (2005). Cannabinoid-based drugs as anti-inflammatory therapeutics. Nature Reviews.
Immunology, 5, 400–411.
Klein, T.W., Newton, C.A., Nakachi, N., et al. (2000). Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol treatment suppresses
immunity and early IFN-gamma, IL-12, and IL-12 receptor beta 2 responses to Legionella pneumophila
infection. Journal of Immunology, 164, 6461–6466.
Krueger, J.G. and Bowcock, A. (2005). Psoriasis pathophysiology: current concepts of pathogenesis. Annals
of the Rheumatic Diseases, 64, 30–36.
Kupczyk, P., Reich, A., and Szepietowski, J.C. (2009). Cannabinoid system in the skin – a possible target
for future therapies in dermatology. Experimental Dermatology, 18, 669–679.

597

598

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

LeRoy, E.C. and Medsger, T.A., Jr. (2001). Criteria for the classification of early systemic sclerosis. The
Journal of Rheumatology, 28, 1573–1576.
Leung, D.Y. and Bieber, T. (2003). Atopic dermatitis. Lancet, 361, 151–160.
Lodzki, M., Godin, B., Rakou, L., et al. (2003). Cannabidiol-transdermal delivery and anti-inflammatory
effect in a murine model. Journal of Controlled Release, 93, 377–387.
Maccarrone, M., Dainese, E., Oddi, S. (2010), Intracellular trafficking of AEA: new concepts for signaling,
Trends in Biochemical Sciences, 35 (11), 601–608.
Maccarrone, M., Di Rienzo, M., Battista, N., et al. (2003). The endocannabinoid system in human
keratinocytes. Evidence that anandamide inhibits epidermal differentiation through CB1 receptordependent inhibition of protein kinase C, activation protein-1, and transglutaminase. The Journal of
Biological Chemistry, 278, 33896–33903.
Maccarrone, M., Fiorucci, L., Erba, F., et al. (2000). Human mast cells take up and hydrolyze anandamide
under the control of 5-lipoxygenase and do not express cannabinoid receptors. FEBS Letters, 468,
176–180.
Maekawa, T., Nojima, H., Kuraishi, Y., et al. (2006). The cannabinoid CB2 receptor inverse agonist
JTE-907 suppresses spontaneous itch-associated responses of NC mice, a model of atopic dermatitis.
European Journal of Pharmacology, 542, 179–183.
Magina, S., Esteves-Pinto, C., Moura, E., et al. (2011). Inhibition of basal and ultraviolet B-induced melanogenesis by cannabinoid CB1 receptors: a keratinocyte-dependent effect. Archives of Dermatological
Research, 303, 201–210.
Maione, S., De Petrocellis, L., de Novellis, V., et al. (2007). Analgesic actions of N-arachidonoyl-serotonin,
a fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibitor with antagonistic activity at vanilloid TRPV1 receptors. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 150, 766–781.
Malan, T.P., Jr., Ibrahim, M.M., Vanderah, T.W., et al. (2002). Inhibition of pain responses by activation
of CB2 cannabinoid receptors. Chemistry and Physics of Lipids, 121, 191–200.
Malfait, A.M., Gallily, R., Sumariwalla, P.F., et al. (2000). The nonpsychoactive cannabis constituent cannabidiol is an oral anti-arthritic therapeutic in murine collagen-induced arthritis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 97, 9561–9566.
Marquart, S., Zerr, P., Akhmetshina, A., et al. (2010). Inactivation of the cannabinoid receptor CB1 prevents leukocyte infiltration and experimental fibrosis. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 62, 3467–3476.
McPartland, J.M. (2008). Expression of the endocannabinoid system in fibroblasts and myofascial tissues.
Journal of Bodywork and Movement Therapies, 12, 169–182.
Michalski, C.W., Maier, M., Erkan, M., et al. (2008). Cannabinoids reduce markers of inflammation and
fibrosis in pancreatic stellate cells. PLoS One, 3, e1701.
Mimura, T., Ueda, Y., Watanabe, Y., et al. (2012). The cannabinoid receptor-2 is involved in allergic
inflammation. Life Sciences, 90, 862–866.
Neff, G.W., O’Brien, C.B., Reddy, K.R., et al. (2002). Preliminary observation with dronabinol in
patients with intractable pruritus secondary to cholestatic liver disease. The American Journal of
Gastroenterology, 97, 2117–2119.
Newton, C.A., Klein, T.W., and Friedman, H. (1994). Secondary immunity to Legionella pneumophila
and Th1 activity are suppressed by delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol injection. Infection and Immunity, 62,
4015–4020.
O’Sullivan, S.E., Tarling, E.J., Bennett, A.J., et al. (2005). Novel time-dependent vascular actions of Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol mediated by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma. Biochemical and
Biophysical Research Communications, 337, 824–831.
Oddi, S., Bari, M., Battista, N., et al. (2005). Confocal microscopy and biochemical analysis reveal spatial
and functional separation between anandamide uptake and hydrolysis in human keratinocytes. Cellular
and Molecular Life Sciences, 62, 386–395.

Phytocannabinoids and Skin Disorders

Oka, S., Wakui, J., Ikeda, S., et al. (2006). Involvement of the cannabinoid CB2 receptor and its endogenous
ligand 2-arachidonoylglycerol in oxazolone-induced contact dermatitis in mice. Journal of Immunology,
177, 8796–8805.
Pacher, P., Batkai, S., and Kunos, G. (2006). The endocannabinoid system as an emerging target of pharmacotherapy. Pharmacological Reviews, 58, 389–462.
Pacifici, R., Zuccaro, P., Pichini, S., et al. (2003). Modulation of the immune system in cannabis users.
JAMA: the Journal of the American Medical Association, 289, 1929–1931.
Palumbo-Zerr, K., Horn, A., Distler, A., et al. (2012). Inactivation of fatty acid amide hydrolase exacerbates experimental fibrosis by enhanced endocannabinoid-mediated activation of CB1. Annals of the
Rheumatic Diseases, 71, 2051–2054.
Paradisi, A., Pasquariello, N., Barcaroli, D., et al. (2008). Anandamide regulates keratinocyte differentiation by inducing DNA methylation in a CB1 receptor-dependent manner. The Journal of Biological
Chemistry, 283, 6005–6012.
Pasquariello, N., Oddi, S., Malaponti, M., et al. (2009). Regulation of gene transcription and keratinocyte
differentiation by anandamide. Vitamins and Hormones, 81, 441–467.
Petrosino, S., Cristino, L., Karsak, M., et al. (2010). Protective role of palmitoylethanolamide in contact
allergic dermatitis. Allergy, 65, 698–711.
Petrosino, S. and Di Marzo, V. (2010). FAAH and MAGL inhibitors: therapeutic opportunities from regulating endocannabinoid levels. Current Opinion in Investigational Drugs, 11, 51–62.
Pucci, M., Pasquariello, N., Battista, N., et al. (2012). Endocannabinoids stimulate human melanogenesis
via type-1 cannabinoid receptor. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 287, 15466–15478.
Pulvirenti, N., Nasca, M.R., and Micali, G. (2007). Topical adelmidrol 2% emulsion, a novel aliamide, in
the treatment of mild atopic dermatitis in pediatric subjects: a pilot study. Acta dermatovenerologica
Croatica, 15, 80–83.
Richardson, J.D., Kilo, S., and Hargreaves, K.M. (1998). Cannabinoids reduce hyperalgesia and inflammation via interaction with peripheral CB1 receptors. Pain, 75, 111–119.
Roelandt, T., Heughebaert, C., Bredif, S., et al. (2012). Cannabinoid receptors 1 and 2 oppositely regulate
epidermal permeability barrier status and differentiation. Experimental Dermatology, 21, 688–693.
Rukwied, R., Watkinson, A., McGlone, F., et al. (2003). Cannabinoid agonists attenuate capsaicin-induced
responses in human skin. Pain, 102, 283–288.
Russo, E.B. (2011). Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage
effects. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1344–1364.
Scuderi, M.R., Cantarella, G., Scollo, M., et al. (2011). The antimitogenic effect of the cannabinoid receptor agonist WIN55212-2 on human melanoma cells is mediated by the membrane lipid raft. Cancer
Letters, 310, 240–249.
Servettaz, A., Kavian, N., Nicco, C., et al. (2010). Targeting the cannabinoid pathway limits the development of fibrosis and autoimmunity in a mouse model of systemic sclerosis. The American Journal of
Pathology, 177, 187–196.
Sofia, R.D., Nalepa, S.D., Harakal, J.J., et al. (1973). Anti-edema and analgesic properties of delta9tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 186, 646–655.
Stander, S., Schmelz, M., Metze, D., et al. (2005). Distribution of cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1) and 2 (CB2) on
sensory nerve fibers and adnexal structures in human skin. Journal of Dermatological Science, 38, 177–188.
Stern, E. and Lambert, D.M. (2007). Medicinal chemistry endeavors around the phytocannabinoids.
Chemistry & Biodiversity, 4, 1707–1728.
Sugawara, K., Biro, T., Tsuruta, D., et al. (2012). Endocannabinoids limit excessive mast cell maturation
and activation in human skin. The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 129, 726–738.
Teixeira-Clerc, F., Julien, B., Grenard, P., et al. (2006). CB1 cannabinoid receptor antagonism: a new strategy for the treatment of liver fibrosis. Nature Medicine, 12, 671–676.

599

600

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Telek, A., Biro, T., Bodo, E., et al. (2007). Inhibition of human hair follicle growth by endo- and exocannabinoids. FASEB Journal, 21, 3534–3541.
Toth, B.I., Dobrosi, N., Dajnoki, A., et al. (2011). Endocannabinoids modulate human epidermal keratinocyte proliferation and survival via the sequential engagement of cannabinoid receptor-1 and transient
receptor potential vanilloid-1. The Journal of Investigative Dermatology, 131, 1095–1104.
Tubaro, A., Giangaspero, A., Sosa, S., et al. (2010). Comparative topical anti-inflammatory activity of cannabinoids and cannabivarins. Fitoterapia, 81, 816–819.
Turner, C.E. and Elsohly, M.A. (1981). Biological activity of cannabichromene, its homologs and isomers.
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 283S–291S.
Ueda, Y., Miyagawa, N., Matsui, T., et al. (2005). Involvement of cannabinoid CB2 receptor-mediated
response and efficacy of cannabinoid CB2 receptor inverse agonist, JTE-907, in cutaneous inflammation
in mice. European Journal of Pharmacology, 520, 164–171.
Ueda, Y., Miyagawa, N., and Wakitani, K. (2007). Involvement of cannabinoid CB2 receptors in the IgEmediated triphasic cutaneous reaction in mice. Life Sciences, 80, 414–419.
Watson, E.S., Murphy, J.C., and Turner, C.E. (1983). Allergenic properties of naturally occurring cannabinoids. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 72, 954–955.
Wilkinson, J.D. and Williamson, E.M. (2007). Cannabinoids inhibit human keratinocyte proliferation
through a non-CB1/CB2 mechanism and have a potential therapeutic value in the treatment of psoriasis.
Journal of Dermatological Science, 45, 87–92.
Williams, H.C., Dellavalle, R.P., and Garner, S. (2012). Acne vulgaris. Lancet, 379, 361–372.
Wirth, P.W., Watson, E.S., ElSohly, M., et al. (1980). Anti-inflammatory properties of cannabichromene.
Life Sciences, 26, 1991–1995.
Zhao, Z.G., Li, Y.Y., Yang, J., et al. (2010). Expression of cannabinoid receptor 2 in squamous cell carcinoma. Journal of Southern Medical University, 30, 593–595.
Zheng, D., Bode, A.M., Zhao, Q., et al. (2008). The cannabinoid receptors are required for ultravioletinduced inflammation and skin cancer development. Cancer Research, 68, 3992–3998.
Zheng, J.L., Yu, T.S., Li, X.N., et al. (2012). Cannabinoid receptor type 2 is time-dependently expressed
during skin wound healing in mice. International Journal of Legal Medicine, 126, 807–814.
Zutt, M., Hanssle, H., Emmert, S., et al. (2006). Dronabinol for supportive therapy in patients with malignant melanoma and liver metastases. Der Hautarzt; Zeitschrift fur Dermatologie, Venerologie, und
Verwandte Gebiete, 57, 423–427.

Chapter 33

Phytocannabinoids in Degenerative
and Inflammatory Retinal Diseases:
Glaucoma, Age-Related Macular
Degeneration, Diabetic Retinopathy,
and Uveoretinitis
Heping Xu and Augusto Azuara-Blanco

33.1 Introduction
The eye detects light and converts it into electrochemical impulses in neurons. Together with
the brain, the eye provides us with vision. The eye acquires images in a similar manner to a
camera. Light that enters the eye is focused onto the back, i.e., the retina, by the optic system.
The optic system of the eye consists of cornea, lens, and vitreous. The retina is like the photographic film in a camera containing chemicals that can convert light into electrochemical
impulses. There are three layers of neuronal cells in the retina that can transmit these impulses
to the brain: photoreceptors, bipolar cells, and ganglion cells. Photoreceptors together with an
adjacent monolayer of cells named retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) convert light signals into
electrochemical impulses, which are then transmitted to bipolar cells. Ganglion cells receive
signals from bipolar cells and then transmit the signals through the optic nerve to the visual
cortex, which is located in the occipital lobe at the back of the brain, where visual information
is formed.
The eye may lose its visual-acquiring function if pathologies occur in the optic system or the
neural retinal system. Whilst vision loss related to optic system dysfunction, such as corneal
opacification and cataract can be cured by surgical procedures, managing vision loss caused by
neural retinal dysfunction is more challenging. A number of degenerative and inflammatory
conditions may cause neural retinal dysfunction. These include glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy
(DR), age-related macular degeneration (AMD), and uveoretinitis. Although different retinal diseases have different etiologies and involve different molecular pathways, these sight-threatening
diseases share some similarities. For example, both inflammation and neurodegeneration appear
to play a role in lesion development in these conditions. Current management strategies center
predominately on either the removal of the initial triggers, or relieving symptoms, and the longterm effects are not satisfactory. Future therapies may need to bring neuroprotection and antiinflammation into the equation.
This chapter discusses the potential of phytocannabinoids as anti-inflammatory or neuroprotective reagents in the management of glaucoma, DR, AMD, and uveoretinitis.

602

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

33.2 Cannabinoids and the eye
The effect of cannabinoids on the visual system has been known for a long time. Smoking marijuana can cause conjunctival vasodilation (so-called red eye) and a reduction of intraocular pressure (IOP) (Adams et al. 1978; Green 1979). Marijuana smoking can also affect visual function,
including a reduction in visual acuity (VA), alterations in color discrimination, and an increase
in photosensitivity (Dawson et al. 1977; Kiplinger and Manno 1971; Russo et al. 2004). There are
also numerous anecdotal reports that smoking marijuana improves dim-light vision, including
the famous report that Jamaican fishermen smoked marijuana to improve night vision when they
went fishing (Wes 1991). The underlying mechanisms related to marijuana smoking-mediated
visual effects are not fully understood.
The active component of the marijuana plant, Cannabis sativa, is delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC). THC mimics the action of endogenous fatty acid derivatives, referred to as endocannabinoids (eCBs). Endocannabinoids are known to have neuromodulatory roles and are present
in neural and non-neural tissues throughout the body. The effects of THC and the endocannabinoids are mediated by metabotropic and ionotropic receptors that are present in the central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral organs (Diaz-Laviada and Ruiz-Llorente 2005; Pertwee 2005).
There are two well-defined metabotropic cannabinoid receptors, cannabinoid receptor types
1 (CB1) and 2 (CB2) (Matsuda et al. 1990; Munro et al. 1993). Both CB1 and CB2 receptors are
G protein-coupled receptors (McAllister and Glass 2002; Munro et al. 1993; Pertwee and Ross
2002). In addition, the G protein-coupled receptor 55 (GPR55) can also bind cannabinoids
(Sawzdargo et al. 1999). Some eCBs such as arachidonoyl ethanolamide (anandamide, AEA)
can activate the ionotropic transient receptor potential (TRP) vanilloid type-1 cation channel
(TRPV1), also known as vanilloid receptor 1 (VR1) (Ross 2003; Toth et al. 2005).
CB1 receptors and TRPV1 cation channels are expressed predominately by neuronal tissues
(Toth et al. 2005; Tsou et al. 1998), whereas CB2 receptors are expressed mainly in peripheral nonneuronal tissues (Galiegue et al. 1995). In the eye, CB1 receptors and TRPV1 have been detected
in the neural retina. CB1 receptor but not CB2 receptor mRNA was detected in embryonic rat retina (Buckley et al. 1998) and human retina (Porcella et al. 2000). CB1 receptor mRNA also exists in
the ciliary body of the eye (Porcella et al. 1998). Localization of the CB1 receptor in the retina has
been investigated by using immunohistochemistry by several groups. Straiker et al. (1999b) and
Yazulla et al. (1999) reported CB1 receptor expression by bipolar cells, GABAergic amacrine cells,
horizontal cells, and in the inner plexiform layer. CB1 receptors were also detected in rod and
cone photoreceptor terminals (Straiker et al. 1999b). In addition, CB1 receptor expression has also
been observed in goldfish retina (Fan and Yazulla 2003; Straiker et al. 1999a). In mouse eyes, we
detected CB1 receptors in the corneal epithelia, and stroma (Fig. 33.1A), ciliary body (Fig. 33.1B),
retinal ganglion cells (Fig. 33.1C), photoreceptor inner segments (the layer between outer nuclear
layer (ONL) and RPE layer) (Fig. 33.1D), and the optic nerve (Fig. 33.1E).
There is only limited information about the expression of TRPV1 in the eye. Sappington and
Calkins (2008) detected TRPV1 mRNA and protein expression in cultured microglia from rat
retina. Leonelli et al. (2009) found that during the early phases of development, TRPV1 was
expressed mainly in the neuroblastic layer of the retina and in the RPE. In the adult, TRPV1 was
found in microglial cells, blood vessels, astrocytes and in neuronal structures: namely synaptic
boutons of both retinal plexiform layers, as well as in cell bodies of the inner nuclear layer and
the ganglion cell layer (Leonelli et al. 2009). They further showed that there was a higher TRPV1
expression in the peripheral regions than in the central regions of the retina (Leonelli et al., 2009).
Zimov and Yazulla (2007) reported TRPV1 expression in retinal amacrine cells in goldfish retina.

Phytocannabinoids in Degenerative and Inflammatory Retinal Diseases

Fig. 33.1 (See also colour plate section.) CB1 receptor expression in mouse eye. Eye sections from a
3-month-old mouse were stained for CB1 receptor (green) and propidium iodide (red), and observed
by confocal microscopy. (A) cornea, (B) ciliary body, (C) inner retina, (D) outer retina; (E) optic nerve.
CB, ciliary body; Ch, choroid; En, endothelia; Ep, epithelia; GL, ganglion layer; INL, inner nuclear
layer; ONL, outer nuclear layer; RPE, retinal pigment epithelia; Str, stroma.

Any expression of TRPV1 in other parts of the eye such as cornea, ciliary body, choroid, and optic
nerve has yet to be detected.
In the eye, there is evidence that demonstrates CB2 receptor expression in the trabecular meshwork. Cells cultured from porcine trabecular meshwork expressed high levels of CB2 receptor
(Zhong et al. 2005), and treatment of these cells with a CB2 agonist, JWH-015, resulted in p42/44
MAP kinase activation (He et al. 2012; McIntosh et al. 2007; Zhong et al. 2005). The expression
of CB2 receptors in the trabecular meshwork is known to be important for cannabinoid-mediated
lowering of IOP. In mouse eyes, we detected CB2 receptors in the corneal epithelia (Fig. 33.2A)
and ciliary body (Fig. 33.2B).
The expression of CB2 receptors in the retina is controversial. Early work by Porcella et al.
showed that CB2 mRNA expression was undetectable in rat (Porcella et al. 1998) and human
(Porcella et al. 2000) retina. However, Lu et al. (2000) demonstrated CB2 mRNA expression in rat
retina, particularly in the retinal ganglion cell layer, the inner nuclear layer, and the inner segment
of photoreceptor cells. This observation was confirmed by Lopez and colleagues (2011). Using
immunohistochemistry, Lopez et al. (2011) showed that the CB2 receptor was localized in retinal
pigment epithelium, inner photoreceptor segments, horizontal and amacrine cells, cells localized
in the ganglion cell layer, and in the fibers of the inner plexiform layer. The presence of cannabinoid receptors in human retinal pigment epithelial cells was reported in primary cultures and
ARPE-19 cells (Wei et al. 2009). These authors also showed that oxidative stress upregulated CB2
receptor expression (Wei et al. 2009). The role of CB2 receptors expressed in retinal cells under
pathophysiological condition remains to be elucidated.

603

604

Some Potential Therapeutic Targets for Phytocannabinoids

Fig. 33.2 (See also colour plate section.) CB2 receptor expression in mouse cornea and ciliary
body. Eye sections from a 3-month-old mouse were stained for CB2 receptor (green) and propidium
iodide (red), and observed by confocal microscopy. (A) cornea, (B) ciliary body. CB, ciliary body;
En, endothelia; Ep, epithelia; Sc, sclera; Str, stroma.

33.3 Phytocannabinoids in glaucoma
33.3.1 What is glaucoma?

Glaucoma is an age-related chronic optic neuropathy causing progressive visual field (i.e., peripheral vision) loss and, if untreated, it may lead to blindness. The most representative pathologic
finding in glaucoma is the death of retinal ganglion cells by apoptosis.
Glaucoma is the leading cause of irreversible blindness in the world (Congdon et al. 2004). In
Western countries it is the second leading cause of blindness (after AMD), affecting 1–2% of the
population over 40 years old (Bunce and Wormald 2006). With the ageing population the burden
of glaucoma is expected to increase. Treatment (medical or surgical) is aimed at reducing IOP
and helps reduce sight loss from glaucoma. However, for some individuals current treatments are
either not tolerated or ineffective and thus new therapies are needed.
33.3.2 The effect of phytocannabinoids in glaucoma

In 1971, Hepler and Frank first reported a 25–30% IOP lowering effect of smoking marijuana in
a small number of subjects (Hepler and Frank 1971). Other early studies confirmed this effect
in glaucoma patients (Green and Roth 1982; Merritt et al. 1980). The duration of action was
relatively short, about 3–4 hours, and there seemed to be a dose–response relationship. Smoking
marijuana is not advisable for a chronic condition because of the side effects. In addition to the
acute side effects, long-term marijuana smoking is associated with emphysema, and possible
increase in the frequency of lung cancer. Although using marijuana for glaucoma may not be
illegal in some countries or states, professional ophthalmological societies advise against marijuana smoking for glaucoma (Buys and Rafuse 2010; Jampel 2010). Oral, sublingual, and topical
routes of administration of cannabinoids have been explored but with variable clinical success
(Flach 2002; Porcella et al. 2001; Tomida et al. 2006). In a prospective, nonrandomized study in
California led by Flach (2002), glaucoma patients not responding to conventional treatment were
offered orally administered THC or inhaled marijuana in addition to their therapeutic regimen.
Nine patients were enrolled, and although a decrease in IOP was observed in all patients, all chose
to discontinue treatment within 9 months for various reasons (Flach 2002).
IOP is maintained in the eye by the balance between aqueous humor secretion and outflow. The
mechanism of action of cannabinoids in the eye is not well understood, but it probably involves
ocular CB receptors (Crandall et al. 2007; Tomida et al. 2004). The expression of CB1 and CB2

Phytocannabinoids in Degenerative and Inflammatory Retinal Diseases

receptors has been described in the ocular tissues involved in IOP regulation, specifically in the
tissues responsible for aqueous humor secretion (ciliary body epithelium), trabecular meshwork
outflow (trabecular meshwork and Schlemm canal), and uveoscleral outflow (ciliary muscle).
Using the synthetic cannabinoid WIN 55,212-2, Chien et al. (2003) could demonstrate an 18%
reduction in aqueous humor production in monkeys but no significant change in the trabecular
outflow facility. As this percentage appeared not sufficient to account for the total IOP lowering effect, other additional mechanisms were thought to be involved (Chien et al. 2003). The
IOP reducing effect does not seem to be related to a systemic reduction of arterial blood pressure (Korczyn 1980). However, a direct effect on the ciliary processes, and specifically a reduction in capillary pressure, leading to changes in aqueous humor dynamics, has been proposed
(McDonald et al. 1991). Green and Pederson (1973) showed that THC decreased the secretion of
ciliary processes and led to a dilatation of the ocular blood vessels through a possible β-adrenergic
action. Indirect sympatholytic actions in the eye have also been proposed recently (Hudson et al.
2011). In addition, Sugrue (1997) indicated that cannabinoids may inhibit calcium influx through
presynaptic channels and in this way reduce norepinephrine release in the ciliary body, leading to
a decrease in the production of aqueous humor. Porcella et al. (1998) proposed that cannabinoids
might be acting as vasodilators on blood vessels of the anterior uvea, thus improving the aqueous humor uveoscleral outflow. Green et al. (1974, 2001) postulated that some cannabinoids may
influence IOP through a prostaglandin mediated mechanism.
In addition to the IOP-lowering effect of cannabinoids, their neuroprotective properties may
be potentially useful (Crandall et al. 2007; Yazulla 2008). In glaucoma, the final pathway leading
to visual loss is the selective death of retinal ganglion cells through apoptosis. Numerous studies have documented the neuroprotective properties of cannabinoids in the retina (Levin 1999).
There is evidence that THC can inhibit glutamic acid release by increasing K+ and decreasing
Ca2+ permeability and that some synthetic cannabinoids can block glutamate (NMDA) receptors (Jin et al. 2000; Marsicano et al. 2002; Pertwee 2000a; Yoles et al. 1996). These actions are
mediated by presynaptic CB1 receptors. Yoles et al. (1996) using a calibrated crush injury to adult
rat optic nerve (optic nerve axotomy), showed a beneficial effect of HU-211 on injury-induced
metabolic and electrophysiological deficits. However, the optic nerve crush model may not be
suitable for investigating mechanisms responsible for glaucomatous nerve damage. Cannabinoids
such as THC, HU-211, and cannabidiol (CBD) have antioxidant properties. As a result, they can
prevent neuronal death by scavenging toxic reactive oxygen species produced by overstimulation of receptors for the excitatory neurotransmitter, glutamic acid (Hampson et al. 1998, 2000;
Pertwee 2000b).
33.3.3 Topical application of cannabinoids for glaucoma

To minimize possible systemic, adverse side effects and maximize the dose at the site of action,
topical application would be the ideal form of administration. However, natural cannabinoid
extracts as well as synthetic forms are highly lipophilic and have low aqueous solubility, creating
practical difficulties for this mode of administration.
The cornea is usually the major pathway for intraocular penetration of topical medications.
The corneal epithelium is highly lipophilic and its penetration is a rate-limiting step for lipophilic drugs such as cannabinoids (Green and Roth 1982; Jarho et al. 1996; Jay and Green 1983).
Aqueous solubility of the drug is another property important for efficacy of delivery, as the surface
of the eye is constantly moistened by tear fluid. Additional factors affecting corneal absorption
include the molecular size, charge, and degree of ionization. Previous experiments with topical

605

606

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

cannabinoid solutions involved the use of light mineral oil as a vehicle, but proved to be irritant
to the human eye (Green and Roth 1982). Recently, different microemulsions and cyclodextrins
(macrocyclic oligosaccharides) have been shown to improve the corneal penetration of cannabinoids. These formulations successfully induced an IOP lowering effect (Green and Kearse 2000;
Jarho et al. 1998; Laine et al. 2002; Naveh et al. 2000; Porcella et al. 2001).
33.3.4 Future directions in glaucoma

Cannabinoids have the potential of becoming a useful treatment for glaucoma, as they reduce IOP
and seem to have neuroprotective properties. However, several challenges need to be overcome,
including the problems associated with unwanted systemic side effects (psychotropic, reduction
in systemic blood pressure), possible tolerance, and the difficulty in formulating a stable and effective topical preparation. Some cannabinoids such as cannabidiol do not have psychotropic effects,
while maintaining their IOP-lowering action, so that further research on these compounds would
be desirable. Tolerance may develop after repeated use of cannabinoids. However, tolerance might
be beneficial if it develops only or preferentially to unwanted side effects. Research on the possible
use of microemulsions and cyclodextrins or novel formulations to overcome the barriers to ocular
penetration of topically applied cannabinoids should be encouraged (Hingorani et al. 2012).

33.4 Phytocannabinoids in diabetic retinopathy
33.4.1 What is diabetic retinopathy?

Diabetic patients may develop a number of eye complications, including diabetic cataract and DR,
both of which can lead to vision loss. A cataract can be removed by surgery, whereas the management of DR is more problematic. DR is the leading cause of blindness among people of working
age in Western countries (Aiello et al. 1998). The longer a person has diabetes, the higher the
chance he/she might develop DR. After 20 years of disease, nearly all patients with type 1 diabetes
will have at least some DR. For type 2 diabetes, around 80% who are insulin-dependent and 50%
who are non-insulin-dependent will have DR after 20 years’ disease duration (Romero-Aroca
et al. 2010).
At the early stage, the disease is called nonproliferative DR. Patients may present with microaneurysms (localized dilations of the retinal microvasculature), hard exudates, superficial retinal
hemorrhages, and cotton-wool spots in the fundus. Sometimes, the diseased vessels may leak fluid
from the circulation. If the macula is affected by leaky fluid (i.e., diabetic macular edema), vision
loss may ensue. As the disease progresses, damaged blood vessels may not be able to supply sufficient oxygen and nutrients, and new blood vessels grow (proliferative DR). The new blood vessels
are fragile and can cause hemorrhage and ultimately destroy the retina.
In addition to vascular damage, retinal neural cells may also be affected even at the early stages
of the disease leading to retinal neural degeneration. There is growing evidence to suggest that
retinal neurodegeneration is an early event in DR pathogenesis (Lieth et al. 2000; Simo et al.
2012). Retinal ganglion cell and neural cell death is known to be responsible, at least in part, for
the degenerative changes in DR (Kern and Barber 2008).
The underlying mechanisms leading to diabetic retinal vasculopathy and neuropathy are
not fully understood, although oxidative stress and inflammation are known to be important
detrimental factors. Increased superoxide concentration is considered as a causal link between
elevated glucose and the other metabolic abnormalities important in the pathogenesis of DR
(Kowluru and Chan 2007). Cyclooxygenase (COX), and inflammatory mediators, including

Phytocannabinoids in Degenerative and Inflammatory Retinal Diseases

tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-1β and nitric oxide (NO), are known to be
involved in increased vascular permeability, capillary degeneration, and neurodegeneration in
the DR (Tang and Kern 2011).
Apart from controlling hyperglycemia, there is no specific therapy for early stages of DR. The
treatments for proliferative DR include laser (e.g., panretinal photocoagulation (PRP)), vitrectomy, and intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) antibody or steroid injection.
Although these therapies can reduce the risk of catastrophic vision loss from DR if used appropriately and in a timely manner, the beneficial effects are accomplished at the cost of sacrificing
other retinal functions (e.g., PRP destroys the peripheral retina and damages peripheral vision),
or of increasing the risk of developing other ocular complications (e.g., cataract formation and
steroid-induced glaucoma).
Given the limitations and side effects of current treatment modalities for DR, there has been a
continuing effort to explore new effective and safe therapies. Future therapies should tackle the
initial trigger (oxidative stress), reduce the subsequent inflammation, and perhaps also be directed at improving the ability of host cells to deal with the stress (neuroprotection). Cannabinoids
are known to possess therapeutic properties including inhibition of oxidative damage (Hampson
et al. 1998; Marsicano et al. 2002) and inflammation (Buckley et al. 2000; Malfait et al. 2000).
Experimental evidence suggests that cannabinoids may interact with endogenous neurotrophic
factors and may have therapeutic potential for DR (Buckley et al. 2000).
33.4.2 The effect of phytocannabinoids in diabetic retinopathy

The endocannabinoid system is known to be linked to obesity and type 2 diabetes (Lipina et al.
2012). Activation of cannabinoid receptors can affect feeding behavior and energy expenditure
and metabolism (Lipina et al. 2012), and blocking CB1 receptors has been found to prevent
obesity and metabolic dysfunction in various murine models and in humans (Despres, 2007).
Endocannabinoid dysregulation is also involved in diabetic complications. Although the endocannabinoid system is known to exist in the eye, its pathophysiological role remains elusive
(Yazulla 2008). Under diabetic conditions, the levels of AEA were increased in the retina, ciliary
body, and the cornea, whereas the levels of 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) were only increased in
the iris compared to age-matched healthy controls (Matias et al. 2006). The levels of palmitoylethanolamide (PEA) were slightly increased (1.3-fold) in the ciliary body, but not in other tissues of
the eye when compared to age-matched healthy controls (Matias et al. 2006). A more recent study
has shown that hyperglycemia can upregulate CB1 receptor expression and induces cell death in
human retinal pigment epithelia, a type of cell important for the development of DR (Lim et al.
2012). The role of the CB1 receptor in DR was further confirmed by El-Remessy et al. (2011) who
showed that depletion of CB1 receptors or their blockade with SR141716 could prevent retinal
cell death in diabetic mice. These results suggest that the endocannabinoid system is dysregulated
in diabetes and may contribute to DR development, and that modulating the endocannabinoid
system may have therapeutic potential.
Indeed, a beneficial effect of the marijuana-derived cannabinoid, the non-psychotropic phytocannabinoid, CBD, has been demonstrated by El-Remessy et al. (2006) in a rat model of DR. The
authors showed that injection of 10 mg/kg CBD every other day in rats reduced streptozotocin
(STZ)-induced diabetes, prevented blood–retinal barrier (BRB) breakdown and retinal neural
cell death (El-Remessy et al. 2006). They further showed that CBD induces its beneficial effects
by reducing diabetes-induced oxidative and nitrative stress and suppressing TNF-α and VEGF
expression in diabetic rat retina (El-Remessy et al. 2006). In a follow-up study, this group showed

607

608

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

that CBD can enhance the anti-inflammatory effects of adenosine in the retina (Liou 2010; Liou
et al. 2008). In humans, CBD is well tolerated when chronically administered (Cunha et al. 1980),
and has been approved for the treatment of inflammation, pain, and spasticity associated with
multiple sclerosis since 2005 (Barnes 2006). Neither the efficacy of CBD in diabetic patients nor
its limitations have been tested thus far.
33.4.3 Future directions in diabetic retinopathy

Retinal neural degeneration and vascular damage are two major features of DR, and for which
there is currently no effective therapy. The endocannabinoid system appears to be disrupted in
DR, and preclinical studies have shown a protective role of cannabinoids in this disorder. Whilst
the mechanisms underlying the protective actions of cannabinoids should be further investigated, the clinical efficacy of cannabinoid-based medicines should also be explored. Cannabis
and cannabinoids (GW42004 and GW42003) have been used in phase 1/2 clinical trials in diabetic patients to treat diabetic painful peripheral neuropathy or to control cholesterol levels
(ClinicalTrials.gov 2008). It will be worth investigating how these treatments might affect the
progression of DR in such patients.

33.5 Phytocannabinoids in age-related macular degeneration
33.5.1 What is age-related macular degeneration?

AMD is a disease in which retinal neurons of the macula (central part of the retina) degenerate with age, resulting in loss of visual function. AMD is the leading cause of blindness in the
elderly in developed countries. In the US about 15% of people over 80 years old had AMD in
2000 (Friedman et al. 2004) and this number is estimated to increase by more than 50% by 2020,
with over 2.95 million people having AMD (Friedman et al. 2004). In the UK, AMD accounts
for more than 50% of all cases of registered blind or partially sighted (Bunce and Wormald 2006;
Coleman et al. 2008). The prevalence of AMD is continuing to increase with the ageing population (Congdon et al. 2004).
The early stage of the disease is sometimes referred to as age-related maculopathy (ARM).
ARM is linked to drusen formation and hypo- and hyperpigmentation of RPE in the macular area
and at this stage is not associated with any obvious visual impairment. A significant number of
patients with ARM will progress into two late stages, dry AMD (also called geographic atrophic
(GA)) and wet AMD (also called neovascular AMD (nAMD)). Wet AMD accounts for two-thirds
of all late-stage AMD and the remaining one-third is dry AMD. While there is symmetry of latestage disease in the two eyes of a person, these late stages are not mutually exclusive. Patients with
late stages of AMD lose their central vision.
Dry AMD is caused by macular RPE cell death and photoreceptor degeneration and currently,
there is no treatment for dry AMD. Wet AMD is a condition in which abnormal blood vessels
grow into the subretinal space of the macula causing visual damage. Treatment modalities for wet
AMD, however, have improved dramatically over the past decade. Before photodynamic therapy
(PDT) with verteporfin was introduced in 2000 (Schmidt-Erfurth and Hasan 2000), laser photocoagulation was the only available treatment option (Custis et al. 1993). The emergence of antiVEGF as an effective treatment for wet AMD has revolutionized the management of wet AMD.
Licensed anti-VEGFs for wet AMD include pegaptanib (Macugen®), which was approved in the
European Union in 2006 (European Medicines Agency 2013a) and ranibizumab (Lucentis ®▼),
approved in 2007 (European Medicines Agency 2013b). Ranibizumab is now considered the

Phytocannabinoids in Degenerative and Inflammatory Retinal Diseases

standard care for wet AMD. The combination of PDT and anti-VEGF may provide additional
benefits to certain patients (e.g., reduce the frequency of intravitreal anti VEGF injection and better VA improvement) (Heier et al. 2006).
Although anti-VEGF therapy has revolutionized the management of wet AMD, the long-term
effect is not satisfactory. Two phase 3 clinical trials have shown that only 30–38% of patients had
gained greater than 15 letters VA (i.e., be able to read 15 more letters in the VA test) after 2 years
of monthly injections, and around 10% of patients had lost greater than 15 letters VA (Rosenfeld
et al. 2011). Vision loss was associated with an increase in lesion area and RPE atrophy (Rosenfeld
et al. 2011). Further VA improvement in patients receiving anti-VEGF therapy may require protection of photoreceptors and RPE function.
33.5.2 Therapeutic potential of phytocannabinoids in age-related

macular degeneration

Oxidative stress is known to be the initial trigger of AMD, and inflammation may play an important role in retinal lesion development. A combination of antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
activity may offer the possibility to prevent the onset or delay AMD progression. Cannabinoids
possess antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and neuroprotective properties and may be potential
candidates for future AMD therapy. There is evidence to suggest that the endocannabinoid
system is disrupted in human AMD eyes (Matias et al. 2006). The levels of AEA in AMD eyes
were increased compared to age-matched control eyes, although the levels of 2-AG and PEA
were not affected (Matias et al. 2006). We have found that in normal mouse retina, there is an
age-dependent increase in the levels of 2-AG and AEA (Fig. 33.3). In mouse models of AMD, in
which the mice have a deficiency either of chemokine C-C motif ligand 2 (CCL2) or of its receptor (CCR2) and age-dependently develop retinal geographic atrophy (Ambati et al. 2003; Chen
et al. 2011), there is an age-dependent decrease in the levels of 2-AG, and the basal levels of 2-AG
(i.e., at the age of 3 months) are higher in the CCL2 and CCR2 knockout mice than in wild-type
mice (Fig. 33.3). There is no significant difference in the levels of AEA between wild-type and
knockout mice in any age group (Fig. 33.3). Our data suggest that dysregulation of the 2-AG/CB1
pathway may be involved in retinal pathology in AMD.
RPE cell death underlies the pathology of dry AMD. A previous study by Wei et al. has shown
that human RPE cells express both CB1 and CB2 receptors and that the CB1/CB2 receptor agonist,
CP55,940, and the CB2 receptor agonist, JWH-015 significantly protected RPE cells from oxidative damage (Wei et al. 2009). These authors further showed that CP55,940 significantly reduced
the levels of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), strengthened oxidative stress-induced
activation of PI3K/Akt, and reduced activation of the ERK1/2 signal pathway in RPE cells (Wei
et al. 2009). This result suggests that modulating the endocannabinoid system with appropriate
synthetic compounds or phytocannabinoids in AMD may protect RPE from oxidative stressinduced cell death.
33.5.3 Future directions in age-related macular degeneration

Oxidative stress and inflammation play an important role in the pathogenesis of AMD.
Cannabinoids have antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and neuroprotective properties and should
potentially be one of the future therapies for AMD. Future research in preclinical models should
address important practical questions, e.g., which cannabinoids are most effective in AMD, what
is the best route for delivering cannabinoids, and what are the potential side effects?

609

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

A

2-AG

WT
CCR2 KO
CCL2 KO

25000
20000
2-AG (pg/g tissue)

*
15000

*
*

*

*

10000
5000
0

Fig. 33.3 2-AG and AEA levels
in the retina from mice of different ages. The retinal tissues
from mice of different ages
were collected and subjected
to liquid chromatography/mass
spectrometry analysis for AEA
and 2-AG quantification. 2-AG
and AEA levels were normalized
by tissue weight as well as tissue total protein content. *P <
0.05; **P < 0.01 compared to
a group of 3-month old mice
of the same strain (n ≥ 6). CCL
KO, chemokine CCL2 knockout;
CCR2 KO, chemokine receptor
CCR2 knockout.

18
Age (months)

3

B

27

AEA
10
8

AEA (pg/g tissue)

610

WT
CCR2 KO
CCL2 KO

**

6

*

4

*
*

2
0

**
**

3

18
Age (months)

27

33.6 Phytocannabinoids in uveoretinitis
33.6.1 What is uveoretinitis?

Uveoretinitis is an inflammatory condition that involves the uveal tract and the retina. The disease, if left untreated, can cause devastating vision loss. This condition, which can be of infectious
(e.g., bacteria, viruses, parasites, etc.) or non-infectious origin, is known as posterior segment
intraocular inflammation (PSII). PSII is a major cause of visual impairment in working populations. Current treatment of PSII is through local or general suppression of the immune system and
there is an urgent requirement to replace this with one that acts specifically to alleviate disease and
does not raise safety concerns.
Experimental animal models are powerful tools for studying disease mechanisms and testing
potential medicines. Infectious uveoretinitis is modeled by endotoxin-induced uveitis (EIU)

Phytocannabinoids in Degenerative and Inflammatory Retinal Diseases

(Rosenbaum et al. 1980), whereas noninfectious autoimmune uveoretinitis is modeled by immunization with retinal antigens or peptides in rats or mice (i.e., experimental autoimmune uveoretinitis, EAU) (Caspi et al. 1988; 1990; Forrester et al. 1992). Although there are no clinical data
on the effects of cannabinoids or endocannabinoids on uveoretinitis, studies using animal models
have shown that certain cannabinoid compounds possess anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective
properties, and so may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of uveoretinitis.
33.6.2 Therapeutic potential of phytocannabinoids in uveoretinitis

EAU is known to be mediated by T cells autoreactive to retinal antigen (Caspi et al. 1986; Liversidge
and Forrester 1988). Using EAU as a model, we have shown that a CB2 receptor selective agonist,
JWH-133 (Pertwee 1997, 1999) can suppress retinal inflammation (Xu et al. 2007). JWH-133 suppresses inflammation at multiple points in this autoimmune disease model. Firstly, JWH-133 can
suppress dendritic cell activation and antigen presentation by down-regulating the Myd88 signaling pathway (Xu et al. 2007). Secondly, JWH-133 can suppress T cell activation, proliferation, and
inflammatory cytokine production, and finally, JWH-133 can prevent leukocyte trafficking into
the inflamed retina (Xu et al. 2007). Since the binding affinity of JHW-133 for the CB2 receptor
is more than 200-fold higher than for the CB1 receptor (Huffman et al. 1998), the immunosuppressant effect of JWH-133 on EAU is likely to be mediated predominately by the CB2 receptor.

CMP

C

25

Infiltration
Structural

20
15
10
5
0

Control

THC

D 80

30000
25000
20000
15000
1200
800

**

Control
THC

**

400
0

B

THC

Mean Disease Score

Control

None

Con A
Treatment

IRBP

Cytokine (pg/ml)

A

Control
THC

60
40
20
0

**

**

*

*

*

IFNγ IL-2 IL-4 IL-6 IL-10 IL-17 IL-12 IL21 TNFα

Fig. 33.4 (See also colour plate section.) The effect of THC on EAU. EAU was induced in C57BL/6
mice using interphotoreceptor retinoid binding protein (IRBP) peptide 1–20 immunization. Mice
were treated with THC (i.p., daily 5 mg/kg) from day 1–20 post-immunization. Control mice were
treated with the vehicle (Tween-20). (A) Fundus images from control and THC-treated EAU mice.
(B) Histological investigation showing the retinal structural score and infiltration score.
(C) T-lymphocyte proliferation in response to concanavalin A (Con A) or IRBP1-20 peptide stimulation. (D) Cytokine production by splenocytes from control and THC treated EAU mice. *P < 0.05;
**P < 0.01 compared to control group (n ≥ 5).

611

612

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

The fact that JWH-133 has an immunosuppressant effect in the CNS is supported by other studies in which it has been shown that JWH-133 can suppress microglial activation (Ramirez et al.
2005), prevent leukocyte adhesion to brain endothelial cells and reduce leakage via the blood–
brain barrier (BBB) under inflammatory conditions (Ramirez et al. 2012).
THC also has anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects in a mouse model of EAU. Mice
treated with THC developed less severe retinal inflammation (Fig. 33.4A), and had a smaller
amount of both structural damage and cell infiltration (Fig. 33.4B). The reduced inflammation
and retinal neural damage correlate with reduced T cell proliferation (Fig. 33.4C) and inflammatory cytokine (IFN-γ, IL-2, IL-6, IL-17F, and TNF-α) production (Fig. 33.4D).
Not all cannabinoids have the same effect on endotoxin (i.e., lipopolysaccharide, LPS) induced
EIU. El-Remessy et al. (2008) showed that CBD (5 mg/kg) suppressed inflammation and neuronal
apoptosis in a rat model of EIU. However, AEA, an endogenous cannabinoid receptor agonist,
exacerbates retinal inflammation in a rabbit model of EIU (Altinsoy et al. 2011), and the CB 1
receptor inverse agonist AM251 reverses some components of the AEA-induced exacerbation of
inflammation (Altinsoy et al. 2011).
33.6.3 Future directions in uveoretinitis

Uveoretinitis is an inflammation-dominated disease with neurodegenerative components.
Inflammation-induced oxidative stress is known to be the key cause of neurodegeneration.
Uveoretinitis can be pathogen-induced or of autoimmune origin. Experimental studies with
preclinical models have yielded inconclusive results. Future studies should clarify whether cannabinoid therapy is beneficial to both infectious and autoimmune uveoretinitis. Furthermore,
understanding the role of CB1 and CB2 activation in retinal inflammation and neural degeneration in uveoretinitis will be important for designing a target-specific cannabinoid-based therapy.

33.7 Summary
Oxidative stress and inflammation are two major detrimental factors in sight-threatening diseases
including glaucoma, DR, AMD, and uveoretinitis although the relative contribution of each factor
to different diseases may differ. In glaucoma, DR, and AMD, oxidative stress is considered to be
the initial trigger and inflammatory responses secondary to oxidative damage may further contribute to neural cell death, whereas uveoretinitis is an inflammation dominated disease. The generation of ROS or reactive nitrogen species is a key component of the inflammatory response and
plays detrimental roles in neural cell death in uveoretinitis. Targeting oxidative stress and inflammation is a promising strategy for treating these conditions. Cannabinoids have antioxidative,
anti-inflammatory, and neuroprotective properties. The nonpsychotropic cannabinoid, CBD,
which has been shown to have therapeutic potential in a number of preclinical animal models,
offers a promising starting point for further drug development.

References
Adams, A.J., Brown, B., Haegerstrom-Portnoy, G., Flom, M.C., and Jones, R.T. (1978). Marijuana, alcohol,
and combined drug effects on the time course of glare recovery. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 56, 81–86.
Aiello, L.P., Gardner, T.W., King, G.L., et al. (1998). Diabetic retinopathy. Diabetes Care, 21, 143–156.
Altinsoy, A., Dilekoz, E., Kul, O., et al. (2011). A cannabinoid ligand, anandamide, exacerbates endotoxininduced uveitis in rabbits. Journal of Ocular Pharmacology and Therapetics, 27, 545–552.
Ambati, J., Anand, A., Fernandez, S., et al. (2003). An animal model of age-related macular degeneration
in senescent Ccl-2- or Ccr-2-deficient mice. Nature Medicine, 9, 1390–1397.

Phytocannabinoids in Degenerative and Inflammatory Retinal Diseases

Barnes, M.P. (2006). Sativex: clinical efficacy and tolerability in the treatment of symptoms of multiple sclerosis and neuropathic pain. Expert Opinion in Pharmacotherapy, 7, 607–615.
Buckley, N.E., Hansson, S., Harta, G., and Mezey, E. (1998). Expression of the CB1 and CB2 receptor messenger RNAs during embryonic development in the rat. Neuroscience, 82, 1131–1149.
Buckley, N.E., McCoy, K.L., Mezey, E., et al. (2000). Immunomodulation by cannabinoids is absent in
mice deficient for the cannabinoid CB2 receptor. European Journal of Pharmacology, 396, 141–149.
Bunce, C. and Wormald, R. (2006). Leading causes of certification for blindness and partial sight in
England & Wales. Biomed Central Public Health, 6, 58.
Buys, Y.M. and Rafuse, P.E. (2010). Canadian Ophthalmological Society policy statement on the medical
use of marijuana for glaucoma. Canadian Journal of Ophthalmology, 45, 324–326.
Caspi, R.R., Chan, C.C., Wiggert, B., and Chader, G.J. (1990). The mouse as a model of experimental
autoimmune uveoretinitis (EAU). Current Eye Research, 9(Suppl), 169–174.
Caspi, R.R., Roberge, F.G., Chan, C.C., et al. (1988). A new model of autoimmune disease. Experimental
autoimmune uveoretinitis induced in mice with two different retinal antigens. Journal of Immunology,
140, 1490–1495.
Caspi, R.R., Roberge, F.G., McAllister, C.G., et al. (1986). T cell lines mediating experimental autoimmune
uveoretinitis (EAU) in the rat. Journal of Immunology, 136, 928–933.
Chen, M., Forrester, J.V., and Xu, H. (2011). Dysregulation in retinal para-inflammation and age-related
retinal degeneration in CCL2 or CCR2 deficient mice. PLoS One, 6, e22818.
Chien, F.Y., Wang, R.F., Mittag, T.W., and Podos, S.M. (2003). Effect of WIN 55212-2, a cannabinoid
receptor agonist, on aqueous humor dynamics in monkeys. Archives of Ophthalmology, 121, 87–90.
ClinicalTrials.gov. (2008). Efficacy of inhaled cannabis in diabetic painful peripheral neuropathy. Available
at: http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00781001 (accessed December 30, 2012).
Coleman, H.R., Chan, C.C., Ferris, F.L. 3rd., and Chew, E.Y. (2008). Age-related macular degeneration.
Lancet, 372, 1835–1845.
Congdon, N., O’Colmain, B., Klaver, C.C., et al. (2004). Causes and prevalence of visual impairment
among adults in the United States. Archives of Ophthalmology, 122, 477–485.
Crandall, J., Matragoon, S., Khalifa, Y.M., et al. (2007). Neuroprotective and intraocular pressurelowering effects of (-)Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in a rat model of glaucoma. Ophthalmic Research,
39, 69–75.
Cunha, J.M., Carlini, E.A., Pereira, A.E., et al. (1980). Chronic administration of cannabidiol to healthy
volunteers and epileptic patients. Pharmacology, 21, 175–185.
Custis, P.H., Bressler, S.B., and Bressler, N.M. (1993). Laser management of subfoveal choroidal neovascularization in age-related macular degeneration. Current Opinion in Ophthalmology, 4, 7–18.
Dawson, W.W., Jimenez-Antillon, C.F., Perez, J.M., and Zeskind, J.A. (1977). Marijuana and vision –
after ten years’ use in Costa Rica. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 16, 689–699.
Despres, J.P. (2007). The endocannabinoid system: a new target for the regulation of energy balance and
metabolism. Critical Pathways in Cardiology, 6, 46–50.
Diaz-Laviada, I. and Ruiz-Llorente, L. (2005). Signal transduction activated by cannabinoid receptors.
Mini Reviews in Medical Chemistry, 5, 619–630.
El-Remessy, A.B., Al-Shabrawey, M., Khalifa, Y., Tsai, N.T., Caldwell, R.B., and Liou, G.I. (2006).
Neuroprotective and blood-retinal barrier-preserving effects of cannabidiol in experimental diabetes.
American Journal of Pathology, 168, 235–244.
El-Remessy, A.B., Rajesh, M., Mukhopadhyay, P., et al. (2011). Cannabinoid 1 receptor activation contributes to vascular inflammation and cell death in a mouse model of diabetic retinopathy and a human
retinal cell line. Diabetologia, 54, 1567–1578.
El-Remessy, A.B., Tang, Y., Zhu, G., et al. (2008). Neuroprotective effects of cannabidiol in endotoxininduced uveitis: critical role of p38 MAPK activation. Molecular Vision, 14, 2190–2203.

613

614

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

European Medicines agency. (2013a). Macugen. [Online] Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/
index.jsp?curl=pages/medicines/human/medicines/000620/human_med_000898.jsp&mid=
WC0b01ac058001d124 (accessed December 30, 2012).
European Medicines agency. (2013b). Lucentis. [Online] Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/
index.jsp?curl=pages/medicines/human/medicines/000715/human_med_000890.jsp&mid=
WC0b01ac058001d124 (accessed December 30, 2012).
Fan, S.F. and Yazulla, S. (2003). Biphasic modulation of voltage-dependent currents of retinal cones by
cannabinoid CB1 receptor agonist WIN 55212-2. Visual Neuroscience, 20, 177–188.
Flach, A.J. (2002). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in the treatment of end-stage open-angle glaucoma. Transactions of the American Ophthalmological Society, 100, 215–222; discussion 222–224.
Forrester, J.V., Liversidge, J., Dua, H.S., Dick, A., Harper, F., and McMenamin, P.G. (1992).
Experimental autoimmune uveoretinitis: a model system for immunointervention: a review. Current Eye
Research, 11(Suppl), 33–40.
Friedman, D.S., O’Colmain, B.J., Munoz, B., et al. (2004). Prevalence of age-related macular degeneration
in the United States. Archives of Ophthalmology, 122, 564–572.
Galiegue, S., Mary, S., Marchand, J., et al. (1995). Expression of central and peripheral cannabinoid receptors in human immune tissues and leukocyte subpopulations. European Journal of Biochemistry, 232,
54–61.
Green, K. (1979). Marihuana in ophthalmology-past, present and future. Annals of Ophthalmology, 11,
203–205.
Green, K. and Roth, M. (1982). Ocular effects of topical administration of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in
man. Archives of Ophthalmology, 100, 265–267.
Green, K. and Podos, S.M. (1974). Antagonism of arachidonic acid-induced ocular effects by delta1tetrahydrocannabinol. Investigative Ophthalmology, 13, 422–429.
Green, K. and Pederson, J.E. (1973). Effect of 1-tetrahydrocannabinol on aqueous dynamics and ciliary
body permeability in the rabbit. Experimental Eye Research, 15, 499–507.
Green, K., Kearse, E.C., and McIntyre, O.L. (2001). Interaction between delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and
indomethacin. Ophthalmic Research, 33, 217–220.
Green, K.E. and Kearse, C.E. (2000). Ocular penetration of topical delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol from rabbit corneal or cul-de-sac application site. Current Eye Research, 21, 566–570.
Hampson, A.J., Grimaldi, M., Axelrod, J., and Wink, D. (1998). Cannabidiol and (-)delta9tetrahydrocannabinol are neuroprotective antioxidants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 95, 8268–8273.
Hampson, A.J., Grimaldi, M., Lolic. M., Wink, D., Rosenthal, R., and Axelrod, J. (2000). Neuroprotective
antioxidants from marijuana. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 899, 274–282.
He, F., Kumar, A., Song, Z.H. (2012). Heat shock protein 90 is an essential molecular chaperone for CB2
cannabinoid receptor-mediated signaling in trabecular meshwork cells. Molecular Vision, 18, 2839–
2846.
Heier, J.S., Boyer, D.S., Ciulla, T.A., et al. (2006). Ranibizumab combined with verteporfin photodynamic
therapy in neovascular age-related macular degeneration: year 1 results of the FOCUS Study. Archives of
Ophthalmology, 124, 1532–1542.
Hepler, R.S. and Frank, I.R. (1971). Marihuana smoking and intraocular pressure. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 217, 1392.
Hingorani, T., Gul, W., Elsohly, M., Repka, M.A., and Majumdar, S. (2012). Effect of ion pairing on in
vitro transcorneal permeability of a delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol prodrug: potential in glaucoma therapy. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 101, 616–626.
Hudson, B.D., Beazley, M., Szczesniak, A.M., Straiker, A., and Kelly, M.E. (2011). Indirect sympatholytic
actions at beta-adrenoceptors account for the ocular hypotensive actions of cannabinoid receptor agonists. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 339, 757–767.

Phytocannabinoids in Degenerative and Inflammatory Retinal Diseases

Huffman, J.W., Liddle, J., Duncan, S.G., Jr., Yu, S., Martin, B.R., and Wiley, J.L. (1998). Synthesis and
pharmacology of the isomeric methylheptyl-delta8-tetrahydrocannabinols. Bioorganic and Medical
Chemistry, 6, 2383–2396.
Jampel, H. (2010). American glaucoma society position statement: marijuana and the treatment of glaucoma. Journal of Glaucoma, 19, 75–76.
Jarho, P., Pate, D.W., Brenneisen, R., and Jarvinen, T. (1998). Hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin and
its combination with hydroxypropyl-methylcellulose increases aqueous solubility of delta9tetrahydrocannabinol. Life Sciences, 63, PL381–384.
Jarho, P., Urtti, A., Jarvinen, K., Pate, D.W., and Jarvinen, T. (1996). Hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin
increases aqueous solubility and stability of anandamide. Life Sciences, 58, PL181–185.
Jay, W.M. and Green, K. (1983). Multiple-drop study of topically applied 1% delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol
in human eyes. Archives of Ophthalmology, 101, 591–593.
Jin, K.L., Mao, X.O., Goldsmith, P.C., and Greenberg, D.A. (2000). CB1 cannabinoid receptor induction
in experimental stroke. Annals of Neurology, 48, 257–261.
Kearse, E.C. and Green, K. (2000). Effect of vehicle upon in vitro transcorneal permeability and intracorneal content of Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Current Eye Research, 20, 496–501.
Kern, T.S. and Barber, A.J. (2008). Retinal ganglion cells in diabetes. Journal of Physiology, 586, 4401–4408.
Kiplinger, G.F. and Manno, J.E. (1971). Dose-response relationships to cannabis in human subjects.
Pharmacology Reviews, 23, 339–347.
Korczyn, A.D. (1980). The ocular effects of cannabinoids. General Pharmacology, 11, 419–423.
Kowluru, R.A. and Chan, P.S. (2007). Oxidative stress and diabetic retinopathy. Experimental Diabetes
Research, 2007, 43603.
Laine, K., Jarvinen, K., Mechoulam, R., Breuer, A., and Jarvinen, T. (2002). Comparison of the enzymatic
stability and intraocular pressure effects of 2-arachidonylglycerol and noladin ether, a novel putative
endocannabinoid. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 43, 3216–3222.
Leonelli, M., Martins, D.O., Kihara, A.H., and Britto, L.R. (2009). Ontogenetic expression of the vanilloid
receptors TRPV1 and TRPV2 in the rat retina. International Journal of Developmental Neuroscience, 27,
709–718.
Levin, L.A. (1999). Direct and indirect approaches to neuroprotective therapy of glaucomatous optic neuropathy. Survey of Ophthalmology, 43(Suppl 1), S98–101.
Lieth, E., Gardner, T.W., Barber, A.J., Antonetti, D.A., Penn State Retina Research Group. (2000).
Retinal neurodegeneration: early pathology in diabetes. Clinical and Experimental Ophthalmology, 28,
3–8.
Lim, S.K., Park, M.J., Lim, J.C., et al. (2012). Hyperglycemia induces apoptosis via CB1 activation through
the decrease of FAAH 1 in retinal pigment epithelial cells. Journal of Cell Physiology, 227, 569–577.
Liou, G.I. (2010). Diabetic retinopathy: role of inflammation and potential therapies for anti-inflammation.
World Journal of Diabetes, 1, 12–18.
Liou, G.I., Auchampach, J.A., Hillard, C.J., et al. (2008). Mediation of cannabidiol anti-inflammation
in the retina by equilibrative nucleoside transporter and A2A adenosine receptor. Investigative
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 49, 5526–5531.
Lipina, C., Rastedt, W., Irving, A.J., and Hundal, H.S. (2012). New vistas for treatment of obesity and diabetes? Endocannabinoid signalling and metabolism in the modulation of energy balance. Bioessays, 34,
681–691.
Liversidge, J. and Forrester, J.V. (1988). Experimental autoimmune uveitis (EAU): immunophenotypic
analysis of inflammatory cells in chorio retinal lesions. Current Eye Research, 7, 1231–1241.
Lopez, E.M., Tagliaferro, P., Onaivi, ES., and Lopez-Costa, J.J. (2011). Distribution of CB2 cannabinoid
receptor in adult rat retina. Synapse, 65, 388–392.
Lu, Q., Straiker, A., Lu, Q., and Maguire, G. (2000). Expression of CB2 cannabinoid receptor mRNA in
adult rat retina. Visual Neuroscience, 17, 91–95.

615

616

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Malfait, A.M., Gallily, R., Sumariwalla, P.F., et al. (2000). The nonpsychoactive cannabis constituent cannabidiol is an oral anti-arthritic therapeutic in murine collagen-induced arthritis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 97, 9561–9566.
Marsicano. G., Moosmann, B., Hermann, H., Lutz, B., and Behl, C. (2002). Neuroprotective properties of
cannabinoids against oxidative stress: role of the cannabinoid receptor CB1. Journal of Neurochemistry,
80, 448–456.
Matias, I., Wang, J.W., Moriello, A.S., Nieves, A., Woodward, D.F., and Di Marzo, V. (2006). Changes in
endocannabinoid and palmitoylethanolamide levels in eye tissues of patients with diabetic retinopathy
and age-related macular degeneration. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes & Essential Fatty Acids, 75, 413–418.
Matsuda, L.A., Lolait, S.J., Brownstein, M.J., Young, A.C., and Bonner, T.I. (1990). Structure of a cannabinoid receptor and functional expression of the cloned cDNA. Nature, 346, 561–564.
McAllister, S.D. and Glass, M. (2002). CB1 and CB2 receptor-mediated signalling: a focus on endocannabinoids. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes & Essential Fatty Acids, 66, 161–171.
McDonald, T.F., Cheeks, L., Slagle, T., and Green, K. (1991). Marijuana-derived material-induced changes
in monkey ciliary processes differ from those in rabbit ciliary processes. Current Eye Research, 10,
305–312.
McIntosh, B.T., Hudson, B., Yegorova, S., Jollimore, C.A., and Kelly, M.E. (2007). Agonist-dependent
cannabinoid receptor signalling in human trabecular meshwork cells. British Journal of Pharmacology,
152, 1111–1120.
Mechoulam, R., Peters, M., Murillo-Rodriguez, E., and Hanus, L.O. (2007). Cannabidiol--recent advances. Chemistry & Biodiverssity, 4, 1678–1692.
Merritt, J.C., Crawford, W.J., Alexander, P.C., Anduze, A.L., and Gelbart, S.S. (1980). Effect of marihuana on intraocular and blood pressure in glaucoma. Ophthalmology, 87, 222–228.
Munro, S., Thomas, K.L., and Abu-Shaar, M. (1993). Molecular characterization of a peripheral receptor
for cannabinoids. Nature, 365, 61–65.
Naveh, N., Weissman, C., Muchtar, S., Benita, S., and Mechoulam, R. (2000). A submicron emulsion of
HU-211, a synthetic cannabinoid, reduces intraocular pressure in rabbits. Graefes Archives of Clinical
and Experimental Ophthalmology, 238, 334–338.
Pertwee, R.G. (2005). The therapeutic potential of drugs that target cannabinoid receptors or modulate the
tissue levels or actions of endocannabinoids. The AAPS Journal, 7, E625–54.
Pertwee, R.G. (2000a). Cannabinoid receptor ligands: clinical and neuropharmacological considerations, relevant to future drug discovery and development. Expert Opinion on Investigational Drugs, 9,
1553–1571.
Pertwee, R.G. (2000b). Neuropharmacology and therapeutic potential of cannabinoids. Addiction Biology,
5, 37–46.
Pertwee, R.G. (1999). Pharmacology of cannabinoid receptor ligands. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 6,
635–664.
Pertwee, R.G. (1997). Pharmacology of cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors. Pharmacology & Therapeutics,
74, 129–180.
Pertwee, R.G. and Ross, R.A. (2002). Cannabinoid receptors and their ligands. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes
& Essential Fatty Acids, 66, 101–121.
Porcella, A., Maxia, C., Gessa, G.L., and Pani, L. (2001). The synthetic cannabinoid WIN55212-2 decreases the intraocular pressure in human glaucoma resistant to conventional therapies. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 13, 409–412.
Porcella, A., Maxia, C., Gessa, G.L., and Pani, L. (2000). The human eye expresses high levels of CB1 cannabinoid receptor mRNA and protein. European Journal of Neuroscience, 12, 1123–1127.
Porcella, A., Casellas, P., Gessa, G.L., and Pani, L. (1998). Cannabinoid receptor CB1 mRNA is highly
expressed in the rat ciliary body: implications for the antiglaucoma properties of marihuana. Molecular
Brain Research, 58, 240–245.

Phytocannabinoids in Degenerative and Inflammatory Retinal Diseases

Ramirez, B.G., Blazquez, C., Gomez, d.P., Guzman, M., and de Ceballos, M.L. (2005). Prevention of
Alzheimer’s disease pathology by cannabinoids: neuroprotection mediated by blockade of microglial
activation. Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 1904–1913.
Ramirez, S.H., Hasko, J., Skuba, A., et al. (2012). Activation of cannabinoid receptor 2 attenuates
leukocyte-­endothelial cell interactions and blood-brain barrier dysfunction under inflammatory conditions. Journal of Neuroscience, 32, 4004–4016.
Romero-Aroca, P., Sagarra-Alamo, R., Basora-Gallisa, J., Basora-Gallisa, T., Baget-Bernaldiz, M., and
Bautista-Perez, A. (2010). Prospective comparison of two methods of screening for diabetic retinopathy
by nonmydriatic fundus camera. Clinical Ophthalmology, 4, 1481–1488.
Rosenbaum, J.T., McDevitt, H.O., Guss, R.B., and Egbert, P.R. (1980). Endotoxin-induced uveitis in rats
as a model for human disease. Nature, 286, 611–613.
Rosenfeld, P.J., Shapiro, H., Tuomi, L., et al. (2011). Characteristics of patients losing vision after 2 years
of monthly dosing in the phase III ranibizumab clinical trials. Ophthalmology, 118, 523–530.
Ross, R.A. (2003). Anandamide and vanilloid TRPV1 receptors. British Journal of Pharmacology, 140,
790–801.
Russo, E.B., Burnett, A., Hall, B., Parker, K.K. (2005). Agonistic properties of cannabidiol at 5-HT1a
receptors. Neurochemical Research, 30, 1037–1043.
Russo, E.B., Merzouki, A., Mesa, J.M., Frey, K.A., and Bach, P.J. (2004). Cannabis improves night vision: a
case study of dark adaptometry and scotopic sensitivity in kif smokers of the Rif mountains of northern
Morocco. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 93, 99–104.
Ryberg, E., Larsson, N., Sjogren, S., et al. (2007). The orphan receptor GPR55 is a novel cannabinoid
receptor. British Journal of Pharmacology, 152, 1092–1101.
Sappington, R.M. and Calkins, D.J. (2008). Contribution of TRPV1 to microglia-derived IL-6 and
NFkappaB translocation with elevated hydrostatic pressure. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual
Science, 49, 3004–3017.
Sawzdargo, M., Nguyen, T., Lee, D.K., et al. (1999). Identification and cloning of three novel human
G protein-coupled receptor genes GPR52, PsiGPR53 and GPR55: GPR55 is extensively expressed in
human brain. Molecular Brain Research, 64, 193–198.
Schmidt-Erfurth, U., Hasan, T. (2000). Mechanisms of action of photodynamic therapy with verteporfin
for the treatment of age-related macular degeneration. Survey of Ophthalmology, 45, 195–214.
Simo, R., Hernandez, C., European Consortium for the Early Treatment of Diabetic Retinopathy
(EUROCONDOR). (2012). Neurodegeneration is an early event in diabetic retinopathy: therapeutic
implications. British Journal of Ophthalmology, 96, 1285–1290.
Straiker, A., Stella, N., Piomelli, D., Mackie, K., Karten, H.J., and Maguire, G. (1999a). Cannabinoid CB1
receptors and ligands in vertebrate retina: localization and function of an endogenous signaling system.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 96, 14565–14570.
Straiker, A.J., Maguire, G., Mackie, K., and Lindsey, J. (1999b). Localization of cannabinoid CB1
receptors in the human anterior eye and retina. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 40,
2442–2448.
Sugrue, M.F. (1997). New approaches to antiglaucoma therapy. Journal of Medical Chemistry, 40, 2793–2809.
Tang, J., Kern, T.S. (2011). Inflammation in diabetic retinopathy. Progress in Retinal and Eye Research, 30,
343–358.
Tomida, I., Pertwee, R.G., and Azuara-Blanco, A. (2004). Cannabinoids and glaucoma. British Journal of
Ophthalmology, 88, 708–713.
Tomida, I., Azuara-Blanco, A., House, H., Flint, M., Pertwee, R.G., and Robson, P.J. (2006). Effect of
sublingual application of cannabinoids on intraocular pressure: a pilot study. Journal of Glaucoma, 15,
349–353.
Toth, A., Boczan, J., Kedei, N., et al. (2005). Expression and distribution of vanilloid receptor 1 (TRPV1)
in the adult rat brain. Molecular Brain Research, 135, 162–168.

617

618

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Tsou, K., Brown, S., Sanudo-Pena, M.C., Mackie, K., and Walker, J.M. (1998). Immunohistochemical distribution of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in the rat central nervous system. Neuroscience, 83, 393–411.
Wei, Y., Wang, X., and Wang, L. (2009). Presence and regulation of cannabinoid receptors in human retinal pigment epithelial cells. Molecular Vision, 15, 1243–1251.
West, M.E. (1991). Cannabis and night vision. Nature, 351, 703–704.
Xu, H., Cheng, C.L., Chen, M., et al. (2007). Anti-inflammatory property of the cannabinoid receptor-2-­
selective agonist JWH-133 in a rodent model of autoimmune uveoretinitis. Journal of Leukocyte Biology,
82, 532–541.
Yazulla, S. (2008). Endocannabinoids in the retina: from marijuana to neuroprotection. Progress in Retinal
and Eye Research, 27, 501–526.
Yazulla, S., Studholme, K.M., McIntosh, H.H., and Deutsch, D.G. (1999). Immunocytochemical localization of cannabinoid CB1 receptor and fatty acid amide hydrolase in rat retina. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 415, 80–90.
Yoles, E., Belkin, M., and Schwartz, M. (1996). HU-211, a nonpsychotropic cannabinoid, produces shortand long-term neuroprotection after optic nerve axotomy. Journal of Neurotrauma, 13, 49–57.
Zhong, L., Geng, L., Njie, Y., Feng, W., and Song, Z.H. (2005). CB2 cannabinoid receptors in trabecular
meshwork cells mediate JWH015-induced enhancement of aqueous humor outflow facility. Investigative
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 46, 1988–1992.
Zimov, S. and Yazulla, S. (2007). Vanilloid receptor 1 (TRPV1/VR1) co-localizes with fatty acid amide
hydrolase (FAAH) in retinal amacrine cells. Visual Neuroscience, 24, 581–591.

Chapter 34

Bone As a Target for Cannabinoid
Therapy
Itai Bab

34.1 Introduction
Bone consists of a mineralized extracellular matrix (MEM) and three major cell types, osteoblasts
that form the MEM, osteoclasts that resorb the MEM, and osteocytes that regulate its metabolism.
The osteoblasts and osteoclasts are present on MEM surfaces, whereas the osteocytes are embedded within lacunae within the MEM. By contrast to its inactive appearance, bone is a metabolically active tissue. Bone mass, the primary determinant of skeletal strength, displays sequential
stages throughout life, comprising: (1) a rapid skeletal growth phase accompanied by accrual of
peak bone mass, (2) a steady-state phase whereby bone mass remains constant, and (3) age-related
bone loss (Bab et al. 2007). These changes are governed by bone remodeling, a continuous lifetime process that consists of resorption of the MEM by osteoclasts, and formation of new MEM
by osteoblasts (Parfitt 1982). Osteoporosis is the most widespread example of a bone remodeling
disease. It is the consequence of accelerated loss of bone mass and disrupted architecture, which
leads to weakening of the skeleton and increased fracture risk. The case of osteoporosis highlights
the pathophysiologic importance of bone remodeling. With the progressive aging of the population, osteoporosis is becoming one of the most serious epidemics in developed countries. Nearly
10 million osteoporotic bone fractures in European and North America cost the health system
more than $60 billion annually; half a million elderly people are killed from related complications,
a number expected to double by 2050. Presently, women are more likely to die from a hip fracture
than from breast cancer (Cauley and Bulstra 2007).
It is therefore not surprising that the discovery of the skeleton as a cannabinoid target in the
past decade has triggered a growing interest in the potential of cannabinoids for pharmacological
treatment and genetic diagnosis of bone deficits, primarily osteoporosis. A recent Web of Science
search revealed more than 700 citations of reports on the skeletal cannabinoid system (SCS)
published since 2005 (Bab 2005; Idris et al. 2005; Karsak et al. 2005). This chapter focuses on the
SCS as a therapeutic target for patients with osteoporosis, bone metastatic cancer, and skeletal
wounds.

34.2 The skeletal cannabinoid system
Several key components of the endocannabinoid system have been identified in bone. Anandamide
(AEA) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), are produced by osteoblasts and osteoclasts, reaching
pmol/g and nmol/g concentrations, respectively, similar to their brain levels (Tam et al. 2008).
In addition, a novel endocannabinoid-like, oleoyl serine (OS) has been recently discovered in
bone (Smoum et al. 2010). Diacylglycerol lipases α and β, enzymes critically involved in 2-AG

620

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

biosynthesis, are expressed in osteoblasts, osteocytes, bone-lining cells, and osteoclasts (Tam
et al. 2008). The respective AEA biosynthetic and degrading enzymes, N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase D and fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) are also expressed in bone
cells (our unpublished results). There is a general agreement that type 2 cannabinoid receptors
(CB2) are expressed in both osteoblasts and osteoclasts as well as in their precursors (Bab 2005;
Idris et al. 2005; Ofek et al. 2006; Rossi et al, 2013; Scutt and Williamson 2007). Cannabinoid CB1
receptors are present in sympathetic nerve terminals in bone (Tam et al. 2006). Possibly, CB1 is
also expressed at low levels in osteoblasts and osteoclasts (Idris et al. 2005; Ofek et al. 2006); however, the evidence in support of these findings is still awaiting confirmation.
Although both 2-AG and AEA are considered nonselective agonists of CB1 and CB2, findings in
bone and bone cell cultures suggest differential effects of these ligands. While 2-AG administered
to mice activates CB1 in skeletal sympathetic nerve terminals, thus stimulating bone formation
(Tam et al. 2008; our unpublished results), it has no effect on osteoblasts and may even act as an
inverse agonist in these cells (Tam et al. 2008). AEA stimulates in vitro osteoblast proliferation
(Smoum et al. 2010). In addition, the number of osteoclasts in culture is increased by a direct
challenge with AEA (Idris et al. 2005) or through the action of the FAAH inhibitor URB597 that
leads to increased AEA levels endogenously. It remains to be seen whether these actions of AEA
are mediated by CB1 and/or CB2.
Activation of CB2 has different effects in early osteoblast progenitors and in more mature osteoblastic cells. Early precursors, represented by partially differentiated osteoblastic cells derived
from bone marrow stromal (mesenchymal) stem cells, show limited CB2 expression. Nevertheless,
the selective CB2 agonist HU−308 induces marked expansion of the preosteoblastic pool (Ofek
et al. 2006). Ex vivo colony forming units osteoblastic (CFU-Ob, a surrogate of in vivo preosteoblast number) by bone marrow stromal CB2-deficient cells is markedly diminished, whereas
CFU-Ob formation by wild type (WT) cells is stimulated by HU-308 (Ofek et al. 2006; Scutt and
Williamson 2007). In mature osteoblastic cells, represented by the MC3T3 E1 cell line, the same
ligand stimulates osteoblast differentiated functions such as alkaline phosphatase activity and
matrix mineralization (Bab 2005; Ofek et al. 2006). The mitogenic signaling cascade triggered by
CB2 in osteoblast precursors has been fully elucidated. It consists of Gi-protein-dependent Erk1/2
activation, followed by transcriptional activation of Mapkapk2, which in turn stimulates CREB
and cyclin D1 (Ofek et al. 2011).
In mouse bone marrow-derived osteoclastogenic cultures and in the RAW 264.7 cell line,
CB2 activation inhibits osteoclast formation by restraining mitogenesis at the monocytic stage,
prior to incubation with receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL). It also
suppresses osteoclast formation by repressing RANKL expression in osteoblasts and osteoblast
progenitors (Ofek et al. 2006). Likewise, it has been recently shown that the cannabinoid receptor
agonist ajulemic acid also suppresses osteoclastogenesis (George et al. 2008). Formation of human
osteoclasts is also inhibited by activation of CB2 (Rossi et al. 2013). By contrast, other studies
have reported the stimulation of mouse osteoclast formation and bone resorption by cannabinoid receptor agonists and their inhibition by antagonists (Idris et al. 2005, 2008) and inhibition
of osteoclastogenesis by inverse agonists at CB2 (Yang et al. 2013). These allegedly paradoxical
effects may be species and/or ligand dependent or result from differences in culture conditions.
GPR55, which is antagonized by cannabidiol (CBD), is also present in osteoblasts and osteoclasts. GPR55 activation decreases both osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast function (Whyte et al.
2009). Surprisingly, treatment of mice with CBD reduced bone resorption in vivo (section 34.2.3).
However, inconsistent with this attenuation of bone resorption an effect of CBD on bone mass
has not been reported.

Bone As a Target for Cannabinoid Therapy

Although OS does not target CB1 or CB2, it does increase osteoblast number. In addition, it is
apoptotic for osteoclasts, thus reducing bone resorption by shortening their life span (Smoum
et al. 2010).
34.2.1 CB1 and bone mass

Cannabinoid receptor mutant mice have been extensively used to assess the physiologic role of
CB1 and CB2 in the control of bone mass. While the effect of constitutive CB1 deficiency appears
to depend on the mouse sex and background strain, that of CB2 is more robust. Perhaps more
importantly, the pertinence of findings in CB2, but not CB1 mutant mice to human skeletal health
have already been demonstrated (section 34.3).
A high bone mass phenotype was reported in young, sexually mature CB1-null mice generated on a CD1 background (Idris et al. 2005). However, this observation has been confirmed
only in males (Tam et al. 2006). By contrast, both male and female CB1-null mice generated on a
C57BL/6J background have a low bone mass phenotype secondary to decreased bone formation
rate and increased osteoclast number, a histomorphometric surrogate of bone resorption (Tam
et al. 2006). CB1-deficient mice on either background develop age-related osteoporosis due to a
progressive decrease in bone formation (Idris et al. 2009; our unpublished findings). Regardless
of whether or not CB1 has a role in peak bone mass accrual, the consistent set of data obtained
in aging mice suggests an important role for CB1 signaling in the regulation of bone remodeling
and bone mass.
We have further used CB1-null mice to analyze the mechanism involved in CB1-mediated
effects on bone. In humans, traumatic brain injury (TBI) often stimulates bone formation and
bone mass (Morley et al. 2005). Using a mouse model for TBI, we have replicated the same phenomenon in WT animals, demonstrating an increase in bone formation already 24 h after TBI.
However, this increase could not be reproduced in CB1-null mice (Tam et al. 2008). Given that (1)
CB1 is expressed in sympathetic terminals in close proximity to osetoblasts, (2) sympathetic signaling restrains bone formation, and (3) retrograde CB1 presynaptic signals inhibit neurotransmitter release, we assumed that CB1 super activation after TBI reduces bone norepinephrine levels,
which in turn results in increased bone formation. Indeed, we showed that in WT, but not in CB1
knockout mice, 2-AG production by osteoblasts is stimulated within hours after TBI and is followed by inhibition of norepinephrine levels and increased bone formation rate (Tam et al. 2008).
34.2.2 CB2 and bone mass

During their first 2–3 months of life, CB2-deficient mice accrue a normal peak trabecular bone
mass, but later display a markedly enhanced age-related bone loss; their trabecular bone volume density at 1 year of age is approximately half compared to WT controls (Ofek et al. 2006;
Sophocleous et al. 2011). Reminiscent of human postmenopausal osteoporosis, the CB 2-null
mice have a high bone turnover with increases in both bone resorption and formation which are
in a net negative balance (Ofek et al. 2006). Importantly, low bone mass is the only spontaneous
phenotype so far reported in these mice. Hence, because healthy CB2 mutant mice are otherwise
normal, it appears that the main physiologic role of CB2 is the maintenance of balanced bone
remodeling.
34.2.3 GPR55 and bone mass

Consistent with the in vitro inhibition of osteoclast function by GPR55, young, sexually mature
GPR55-deficient male, but not female mice have a high bone mass phenotype (Whyte et al. 2009).

621

622

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

However, in two independent studies administration of CBD to WT animals had no effect on
their peak bone mass (Whyte et al. 2009; our unpublished results). The effect of CBD on agerelated bone loss has not been studied yet.

34.3 The skeletal cannabinoid system as a therapeutic target
The discovery and characterization of the SCS in mice was soon followed by genetic association
studies of polymorphisms in the human CNR1 and CNR2 loci to assess the cannabinoid receptors
as targets for the risk assessment and treatment of osteoporosis. The CNR1 locus is on chromosome 5q15, a site previously not implicated in osteoporosis. By contrast, the CNR2 locus is on
chromosome 1p36, a genomic region linked to bone mineral density (BMD) and osteoporosis in
several independent association analyses. Its mouse ortholog on chromosome 4 is also associated
with low bone mass (Devoto et al. 2001).
A genetic association analysis of CNR1 and CNR2 in French Caucasian cohorts of postmenopausal osteoporotic women with a low BMD and of age-matched healthy controls suggested that
the CNR1 gene did not play a major role in bone in this sample of osteoporotic women (Karsak
et al. 2005). In contrast, several single nucleotide polymorphisms in the CNR2 gene showed a
significant association with the disease phenotype, suggesting that CNR2 polymorphisms are
important genetic risk factors for osteoporosis. Sequencing the CB2 coding exon in all patients
and controls identified two missense variants, Gln63Arg and His316Tyr, with the Gln63Arg variant being more common in the osteoporotic patients than in the healthy controls (Karsak et al.
2005). These findings have been confirmed in large Chinese and Japanese cohorts and in an
ethnically homogeneous healthy sample of a Chuvashian family (Huang et al. 2009; Karsak et al.
2009;Yamada et al. 2007).
Potentially, CB1 ligands could be tested for osteoporosis. However, given their central adverse
effects there is one study in mice, published prior to the withdrawal of rimonabant, reporting the
efficacy of a nonperipheralized CB1 antagonist in the prevention of osteoporosis (Idris et al. 2005).
Although the efficacy of peripheralized CB1 antagonists has been demonstrated in animal models
of the metabolic syndrome (Tam et al. 2010, 2012), skeletal effects of such agonists have not been
reported. Overall, it seems that the uncertainties associated with the skeletal role of CB1 has held
back further assessment of CB1-based antiosteoporotic therapies.
Unlike CB1, CB2 does not mediate cannabinoid-induced psychotropic, metabolic, or reproductive effects. Therefore, CB2−specific ligands offer an opportunity to prevent and/or rescue bone
loss while avoiding the adverse effects of cannabinoids. Antiosteoporotic therapies are classified
as either preventive, which inhibit bone destruction, or anabolic, which rescue bone loss. Most of
the drugs in use belong to the preventive category, and are generally not particularly efficacious
in the millions of patients who require the addition of new bone to replace that which has already
been lost. Unfortunately, there is only one approved bone anabolic drug, recombinant human
parathyroid hormone (sold as Forteo®), which has limited efficacy on certain skeletal sites and can
be given only by subcutaneous injection for a maximum of 2–3 years (Uihlein and Leder 2012).
Synthetic CB2 agonists like HU-308, which are orally available and have minimal side effects, if
any, offer a solution for this need. Indeed, preclinical studies testing such agonists have demonstrated complete rescue of bone loss induced by estrogen depletion in ovariectomized (OVX)
mice, mainly by stimulating bone formation (Bab et al. 2008; our unpublished results). These
agonists only mildly attenuated OVX-induced bone loss by inhibiting bone resorption (Ofek et al.
2006). Notably, in the rescue model the drug is first given 6 weeks after OVX to allow for bone loss
to occur and for the establishment of a new bone remodeling balance. In the preventive model,

Bone As a Target for Cannabinoid Therapy

agonist administration commences immediately after OVX, at a time when bone presents high
turnover, negatively balanced remodeling. In either protocol, the cannabinoid treatment consisted
of daily intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections for 4–6 weeks. Hence, CB2 agonists are promising candidates, particularly for anabolic therapy for osteoporosis patients.
The endocannabinoid-like OS also has bone anabolic properties. Moreover, its anabolic action
not only rescues bone loss, by both stimulating bone formation and inhibiting bone resorption,
but also increases bone mass in normal mice. In these normal animals it acts only to restrain
resorption. A preliminary indication that other fatty acid amides may have bone anabolic activity
has also been obtained (Smoum et al. 2010).
Interestingly, marijuana smoke inhalation has recently been reported to inhibit endosseous
implant anchorage in rats, negatively affecting both the bone-implant contact and peri-implant
bone (Nogueira-Filho Gda et al. 2008). This is not necessarily inconsistent with the bone anabolic
activity displayed by well-defined cannabinoid receptor agonists, as marijuana contains a mixture
of biologically active phytocannabinoids whose skeletal effects have not been tested yet. In addition, the peri-implant healing process may differ considerably from remodeling of the nontraumatized skeleton and thus responds differently to cannabinoids. Another potentially confounding
issue is the nonselectivity/nonspecificity of many cannabinoid ligands either endogenous, plant
derived, or synthetic. The skeletal relevance of this issue has been recently demonstrated in a
study showing that, at a daily dose of 0.1 mg/kg i.p., the “so-called” CB2 selective inverse agonist
AM630 prevented OVX-induced bone loss in WT but not in CB2-null mice, therefore indicating
CB2 selectivity at this low dose. However, the same preparation was equally effective in preventing
bone loss in WT and CB2-deficient mice at higher doses (Idris et al. 2008). Hence, in the skeleton
and probably elsewhere, cannabinoid ligands may have CB1 and/or CB2 independent effects,
depending on the concentrations or doses used.
Metastatic bone cancer has recently raised interest as a promising target for CB2-based therapy.
Although currently used chemotherapeutics prolong the life of these patients, metastases still
lead to bone loss and increased fracture incidence as well as severe side effects. Opiates, used as
first-line analgesics in these patients, also induce bone loss. In either case, the bone loss is treated
with bisphosphonates, which in turn cause nephrotoxicity and osteonecrosis of the jaws. Using a
mouse model for bone metastatic breast cancer it has been recently demonstrated that the CB2selective agonist JWH015, administered systemically, reduces bone pain, bone loss, and cancer
cell proliferation (Lozano-Ondoua et al. 2013). However, it has not been determined whether
these effects were mediated through a direct action on osteoblasts, osteoclasts, or the cancer
cells, or indirectly, for example, through CB2 activation in resident immune cells. Further studies addressing this and other mechanistic issues will hopefully identify more specific modes and
sites of action.

34.4 Summary
With osteoporosis being the most prevalent degenerative disease in developed countries, it has
attracted a lot of experimental and public attention following the discovery of the skeletal cannabinoid system. Obviously, specific CB2 agonists hold great promise for the millions of osteoporotic
patients worldwide. Questions have been frequently asked regarding whether cannabis and phytocannabinoids are “friends or foes.” Studies carried out in our laboratory and by others have so
far provided negative results: tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) had a small inhibitory effect on peak
bone mass accrual, if any. In addition, we found no skeletal effects of CBD. These data are not conclusive as these cannabinoids could have skeletal effects in older age. In addition, inhaled cannabis

623

624

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

seems to slow down bone wound healing. By contrast, preliminary studies in our laboratory
suggest that CBD, but not THC, improves fracture healing. It would also be interesting to assess
the skeletal efficacy of other plant-derived cannabinoids, like the CB1/CB2 ligand tetrahydrocannabivarin (Pertwee 2007) and the CB2 agonist β-caryophyllene (Gertsch et al. 2008). Obviously,
large-scale clinical and epidemiological studies should provide answers to these pending issues in
spite of the logistic difficulty of conducting such trials.

References
Bab, I. (2005). The skeleton: stone bones and stoned heads? In: R. Mechoulam (ed.). Cannabinoids as
Therapeutics. Milestones in Drug Therapy Series. Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag, pp. 201–206.
Bab, I., Hajbi-Yonissi, C., Gabet, Y., and Müller, R. (2007). Gender and age differences. In: MicroTomographic Atlas of the Mouse Skeleton. New York: Springer, pp. 195–199.
Bab, I., Ofek, O., Tam, J., Rehnelt, J., and Zimmer, A. (2008). Endocannabinoids and the regulation of
bone metabolism. Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 20(Suppl 1), 69–74.
Cauley, J. and Bulstra, S. (2007). Mortality greater for hip fracture than breast cancer in elderly women. In:
American Geriatrics Society Annual Scientific Meeting, Abstract P28, May 2–6, Seattle, Washington.
Devoto, M., Specchia, C., Li, H.H., et al. (2001). Variance component linkage analysis indicates a QTL for
femoral neck bone mineral density on chromosome 1p36. Human Molecular Genetics, 10, 2447–2452.
George, K.L., Saltman, L.H., Stein, G.S., Lian, J.B., and Zurier, R.B. (2008). Ajulemic acid, a nonpsychoactive cannabinoid acid, suppresses osteoclastogenesis in mononuclear precursor cells and induces apoptosis in mature osteoclast-like cells. Journal of Cellular Physiology, 214, 714–720.
Gertsch, J., Leonti, M., Raduner, S., et al. (2008). Beta-caryophyllene is a dietary cannabinoid. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 9099–9104.
Huang, Q.Y., Li, G.H., and Kung A.W. (2009). Multiple osteoporosis susceptibility genes on chromosome
1p36 in Chinese. Bone, 44, 984–988.
Idris, A.I., Sophocleous, A., Landao-Bassonga, E., van’t Hof, R.J., and Ralston, S.H. (2008). Regulation of
bone mass, osteoclast function, and ovariectomy-induced bone loss by the type 2 cannabinoid receptor.
Endocrinology, 149, 5619–5626.
Idris, A.I., Sophocleous, A., Landao-Bassonga, E., et al. (2009). Cannabinoid receptor type 1 protects
against age-related osteoporosis by regulating osteoblast and adipocyte differentiation in marrow stromal cells. Cell Metabolism, 10, 139–147.
Idris, A.I., van’t Hof, R.J., Greig, I.R., et al. (2005). Regulation of bone mass, bone loss and osteoclast
activity by cannabinoid receptors. Nature Medicine, 11, 774–779.
Karsak, M., Cohen-Solal, M., Freudenberg, J., et al. (2005). Cannabinoid receptor type 2 gene is associated
with human osteoporosis. Human Molecular Genetics, 14, 3389–3396.
Karsak, M., Malkin, I., Toliat, M.R., et al. (2009). The cannabinoid receptor type 2 (CNR2) gene is associated with hand bone strength phenotypes in an ethnically homogeneous family sample. Human
Genetics, 126, 629–636.
Lozano-Ondoua, A.N., Hanlon, K.E., Symons-Liguori, A.M., et al. (2013). Disease modification of breast
cancer-induced bone remodeling by cannabinoid 2 receptor agonists. Journal of Bone and Mineral
Research, 28, 92–107.
Morley, J., Marsh, S., Drakoulakis, E., Pape, H.C., and Giannoudis, P.V. (2005). Does traumatic brain
injury result in accelerated fracture healing? Injury, 36, 363–368.
Nogueira-Filho Gda, R., Cadide, T., and Rosa, B.T. (2008). Cannabis sativa smoke inhalation decreases
bone filling around titanium implants: a histomorphometric study in rats. Implant Dentistry, 17, 461–
470.
Ofek, O., Attar-Namdar, M., Kram, V., et al. (2011). CB2 cannabinoid receptor targets mitogenic Gi
protein-­cyclin D1 axis in osteoblasts. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research, 26, 308–316.

Bone As a Target for Cannabinoid Therapy

Ofek, O., Karsak, M., Leclerc, N., et al. (2006). Peripheral cannabinoid receptor, CB2, regulates bone mass.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103, 696–701.
Parfitt, A.M. (1982). The coupling of bone formation to bone resorption: a critical analysis of the concept
and of its relevance to the pathogenesis of osteoporosis. Metabolic Bone Diseases and Related Research,
4, 1–6.
Pertwee, R.G. (2008). The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology of three plant cannabinoids: delta9tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin. British Journal of Pharmacology,
153, 199–215.
Rossi, F., Bellini, G., Luongo, L., et al. (2013). The 17-β-oestradiol inhibits osteoclast activity by increasing
the cannabinoid CB2 receptor expression. Pharmacology Research, 68, 7–15.
Scutt, A. and Williamson, E.M. (2007). Cannabinoids stimulate fibroblastic colony formation by bone marrow cells indirectly via CB2 receptors. Calcified Tissue International, 80, 50–9.
Smoum, R., Bar, A., Tan, B., et al. (2010). Oleoyl serine, an endogenous N-acyl amide, modulates bone
remodeling and mass. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
107, 17710–17715.
Sophocleous, A., Landao-Bassonga, E., Van’t Hof, R.J., Idris, A.I., and Ralston, S.H. (2011). The type 2
cannabinoid receptor regulates bone mass and ovariectomy-induced bone loss by affecting osteoblast
differentiation and bone formation. Endocrinology, 152, 2141–2149.
Tam, J., Cinar, R., Liu, J., et al. (2012). Peripheral cannabinoid-1 receptor inverse agonism reduces obesity
by reversing leptin resistance. Cell Metabolism, 16, 167–179.
Tam, J., Ofek, O., Fride, E., et al. (2006). Involvement of neuronal cannabinoid receptor CB1 in regulation
of bone mass and bone remodeling. Molecular Pharmacology, 70, 786–792.
Tam, J., Trembovler, V., Di Marzo V., et al. (2008). The cannabinoid CB1 receptor regulates bone formation by modulating adrenergic signaling. FASEB Journal, 22, 285–294.
Tam, J., Vemuri, V.K., Liu, J., et al. (2010). Peripheral CB1 cannabinoid receptor blockade improves cardiometabolic risk in mouse models of obesity. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 120, 2953–2966.
Uihlein, A.V. and Leder, B.Z. (2012). Anabolic therapies for osteoporosis. Endocrinology and Metabolism
Clinics of North America, 41, 507–525.
Yamada, Y., Ando, F., and Shimokata, H. (2007). Association of candidate gene polymorphisms with bone
mineral density in community-dwelling Japanese women and men. International Journal of Molecular
Medicine, 19, 791–801.
Yang, P., Myint, K.Z., Tong, Q., et al. (2012). Lead discovery, chemistry optimization, and biological evaluation studies of novel biamide derivatives as CB2 receptor inverse agonists and osteoclast inhibitors.
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 55, 9973–9987.
Whyte, L.S., Ryberg, E., Sims, N.A., et al. (2009). The putative cannabinoid receptor GPR55 affects osteoclast function in vitro and bone mass in vivo. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 106, 16511–16516.

625

Chapter 35

Cancer
Guillermo Velasco, Cristina Sánchez,
and Manuel Guzmán

35.1 Introduction
Preparations from Cannabis sativa L. (marijuana) have been used for many centuries both medicinally and recreationally. However, the chemical structures of their unique active ­components—
the cannabinoids—were not elucidated until the 1960s. Three decades later the first solid clues
on cannabinoid molecular action were established, which led to an impressive expansion of basic
cannabinoid research and to a renaissance in the study of the therapeutic effects of cannabinoids
in various fields, including oncology. Today it is widely accepted that, out of the approximately
108 cannabinoids produced by C. sativa, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is the most relevant owing to its high potency and abundance in plant preparations (Gaoni et al. 1964; Pertwee
2008). THC exerts a wide variety of biological effects by mimicking endogenous substances—
the endocannabinoids anandamide (Devane et al. 1992) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG)
(Mechoulam et al. 1995; Sugiura et al. 1995)—that engage specific cell-surface cannabinoid
receptors (Pertwee et al. 2010). So far, two major cannabinoid-specific receptors—CB 1 and
CB2—have been cloned and characterized from mammalian tissues (Matsuda et al. 1990; Munro
et al. 1993). In addition, other receptors such as the transient receptor potential cation channel
subfamily V member 1 (TRPV1) and the orphan G protein-coupled receptor GPR55 have been
proposed to act as endocannabinoid receptors (Pertwee et al. 2010). Most of the effects produced
by cannabinoids in the nervous system and in non-neural tissues rely on CB1 receptor activation. In contrast, the CB2 receptor was initially described to be present in the immune system
(Pertwee et al. 2010), but more recently it has been shown to be expressed as well in cells from
other origins (Atwood et al. 2010; Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2007). Of note, expression of CB 1 and
CB2 receptors has been found in many types of cancer cells, which does not necessarily correlate
with the expression of these receptors in the tissue type of origin (Fernandez-Ruiz et al. 2007;
Guzmán et al. 2006; Sarfaraz et al. 2008).
The endocannabinoids, together with their receptors and the proteins responsible for their synthesis, transport, and degradation, constitute the endocannabinoid system. Aside from its pivotal
neuromodulatory activity (Katona et al. 2008), the endocannabinoid system exerts other regulatory
functions in the body such as the control of cardiovascular tone, energy metabolism, immunity, and
reproduction (Pacher et al. 2006; Pertwee 2009). This miscellaneous activity makes the pharmacological manipulation of the endocannabinoid system a promising strategy for the management
of many different diseases. Specifically, cannabinoids are well known to exert palliative effects in
cancer patients (Pacher et al. 2006; Pertwee 2009). The best-established use is the inhibition of
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (Guzmán 2003; Pertwee 2009). Today, capsules of
THC (Marinol®) and its synthetic analogue nabilone (Cesamet®) are approved for this purpose.
Cannabinoids also inhibit pain, and thus a standardized cannabis extract (Sativex®) has been already

Cancer

approved in Canada and is currently the subject of large-scale Phase 3 clinical trials for managing
cancer-associated pain. Another potential palliative effect of cannabinoids in oncology, supported
by Phase 3 clinical trials, includes appetite stimulation and attenuation of wasting. In relation to
this, Marinol® can currently be prescribed for anorexia associated with weight loss in AIDS patients.
The therapeutic potential of cannabinoids in oncology may not be restricted to their aforementioned palliative actions. Thus, numerous studies have provided evidence that THC and other
cannabinoids exhibit antitumor effects on a wide array of animal models of cancer (Guzmán 2003;
Sarfaraz et al. 2008; Velasco et al. 2012). Moreover, these observations led to the development of a
pilot clinical study to investigate the antitumor activity of THC in glioma patients. Nonetheless, a
few studies have shown that, under certain conditions, cannabinoid treatment can stimulate cancer cell proliferation in vitro (Cudaback et al. 2010; Hart et al. 2004) and interfere with the tumorsuppressor role of the immune system (McKallip et al. 2005; Zhu et al. 2000). Likewise, there are
conflicting reports regarding the role (tumor-suppressor or oncogenic) of the endocannabinoid
system in cancer (Malfitano et al. 2011) (Box 35.1).

Box 35.1 Biological role of the endocannabinoid system
in tumor generation and progression
To date, little is known about the biological role of the endocannabinoid system in cancer
physiopathology. Although there are some exceptions that may be tumor type-specific, both
cannabinoid receptors and their endogenous ligands are generally upregulated in tumor tissue
compared with non-tumor tissue (Caffarel et al. 2006; Guzmán 2003; Malfitano et al. 2011;
Sánchez et al. 2001). Additionally, different studies have associated the expression levels of
cannabinoid receptors, endocannabinoids, and/or endocannabinoid-metabolizing enzymes
with tumor aggressiveness (Malfitano et al. 2011; Nomura et al. 2010; Thors et al. 2010), which
suggests that the endocannabinoid system may be overactivated in cancer and hence protumorigenic (Malfitano et al. 2011). In support of this, in mouse models of cancer, genetic ablation
of CB1 and CB2 receptors reduces ultraviolet light-induced skin carcinogenesis (Zheng et al.
2008), and CB2 receptor overexpression enhances the predisposition to leukemia after leukemia virus infection (Joosten et al. 2002).
Conversely, and in line with the evidence supporting the hypothesis that pharmacological activation of cannabinoid receptors reduces tumor growth (Guzmán 2003; Sarfaraz et al.
2008), the upregulation of endocannabinoid-degrading enzymes has been observed in aggressive human tumors and cancer cell lines (Nomura et al. 2010; Thors et al. 2010), indicating that
endocannabinoid signaling can also have a tumor-suppressive role. In support of this, deletion
of CB1 receptors accelerates intestinal tumor growth in a genetic mouse model of colon cancer (Wang et al. 2008), increased endocannabinoid levels diminish azoxymethane-induced
precancerous lesions in the mouse colon (Izzo et al. 2008), and a reduction in the expression
of the endocannabinoid-degrading enzyme monoacylglycerol lipase reduces tumor growth in
xenografted mice (Nomura et al. 2010).
Further studies, including those analyzing the activation of the precise signaling mechanisms involved in the regulation of cannabinoid-induced cell death or cell proliferation upon
genetic or pharmacological manipulation of the endocannabinoid system, are therefore needed to clarify which are the contextual determinants for this system to act as either a guardian
or an inducer of tumorigenesis or tumor progression.

627

628

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Cannabinoids
CBR
SPT
P

p8

ER stress

Ceramides

eIF2 α
ATF4
CHOP

(Other AKT targets?)

TRIB3
p27
AKT

p21

CDKs

pRb

BAD
Cell cycle arrest

CaCMKKβ

mTORC1
AMPK

Autophagy
Apoptosis
ψm

Cancer
cell death

Fig. 35.1 Cannabinoid-induced apoptosis relies on the stimulation of ER stress and autophagy.
Scheme depicting the mechanism of cannabinoid-induced apoptosis in glioma, pancreatic,
and hepatocellular carcinoma cells. This signaling route may constitute the main mechanism of
cannabinoid-induced cell death, with some variations inherent to different types of cancer cells.
Cannabinoid agonists bind to CB1 and/or CB2 receptors (CBR) to stimulate de novo synthesis of
ceramide (Carracedo et al. 2006b; Galve-Roperh et al. 2000; Gomez del Pulgar et al. 2002; Herrera
et al. 2006; Salazar et al. 2009), which triggers the induction of an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-related response that promotes the upregulation of the transcription factor p8 and several
of its downstream targets, including the pseudokinase Tribbles 3 (TRIB3) (Carracedo et al. 2006a;
Salazar et al. 2009). This favors the interaction of TRIB3 with AKT (Du et al. 2003; Salazar et al.
2009), thus leading to the inhibition of the AKT–mechanistic target of rapamycin C1 (mTORC1)
axis and the subsequent induction of autophagy (Salazar et al. 2009). Autophagy is upstream of
intrinsic mitochondrial apoptosis in the process of cannabinoid-induced cell death. The importance
of this pathway is highlighted by the ability of different chemical and genetic manipulations to
block cannabinoid-induced cell death. In hepatocellular carcinoma cells the cannabinoid-evoked
and ER stress-dependent activation of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase 2-beta
(CaCMKKβ) and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) leads, together with the p8–TRIB3 pathway,
to autophagy and apoptosis (Vara et al. 2011). The cannabinoid-evoked inhibition of AKT could
promote cycle arrest in breast cancer and melanoma cells, as well as apoptosis, through

Cancer

This chapter summarizes these observations and provides an integrated view of the molecular
mechanisms responsible for cannabinoid antitumor activity. It also discusses the experimental evidence supporting the existence of mechanisms of resistance to the cell death-promoting
actions of THC in certain types of cancer cells, the possible strategies that could be undertaken to
overcome such resistance, and the preclinical data supporting that the combined administration
of cannabinoids and other drugs could be useful in anticancer therapies.

35.2 Preclinical antitumor activity
Since the late 1990s, a large body of evidence has accumulated demonstrating that various cannabinoids exert antitumor effects in a wide variety of experimental models of cancer, ranging from cancer cell lines in culture to genetically engineered mice (reviewed by Velasco et al. 2012). Multiple
cannabinoids have shown this activity, including THC, the endocannabinoids 2-AG and anandamide, and different synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists that have either comparable affinity for
CB1 and CB2 receptors (e.g., WIN 55212-2 or HU-210), higher affinity for CB1 (e.g., methanandamide), or higher affinity for CB2 (e.g., JWH-133). These findings strongly support that, aside from
the role played by the endogenous cannabinoid system in cancer, pharmacological stimulation of
CB receptors is in most cases antitumorigenic. Nonetheless, a few reports have proposed a tumorpromoting effect of cannabinoids (Cudaback et al. 2010; Hart et al. 2004; McKallip et al. 2005; Zhu
et al. 2000). These apparently conflicting observations are discussed in later sections.
Cannabinoids impair tumor progression at different levels. Their most prevalent effect is the
induction of cancer cell death by apoptosis and the inhibition of cancer cell proliferation. At least
one of these actions has been demonstrated in virtually all cancer cell types tested (Velasco et al.
2012). In addition, in vivo experiments have shown that cannabinoids impair tumor angiogenesis
and block invasion and metastasis.

35.3 Mechanisms of antitumor effects
35.3.1 Induction of cancer cell death

A significant amount of the research conducted so far on the mechanism of cannabinoid antitumor activity has focused on glioma cells. Initial studies showed that THC and other cannabinoids
induce the apoptotic death of glioma cells via CB1- and CB2-dependent stimulation of the de
novo synthesis of the proapoptotic sphingolipid ceramide (Blazquez et al. 2004; Galve-Roperh
et al. 2000; Gomez del Pulgar et al. 2002; Sánchez et al. 2001). Further studies, based on the
analysis of the gene expression profile of THC-sensitive and -resistant glioma cells, gave further

Fig. 35.1 (continued) additional mechanisms, including the decreased phosphorylation of the
proapoptotic protein BCL2-associated agonist of cell death (BAD) (Ellert-Miklaszewska et al. 2005)
and the activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitory proteins p21 and p27 (Blazquez
et al. 2006; Caffarel et al. 2008; Caffarel et al. 2006). This would lead to the subsequent decreased
phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein (pRB), which thus would be active to arrest cell cycle.
ATF4: activating transcription factor 4; CHOP: C/EBP homology protein; eIF2α: eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 2 alpha; SPT: serine palmitoyltransferase.
Reproduced from Nature Reviews Cancer, 12(6) Velasco G., Sánchez C. and Guzmán M., Towards the use of cannabinoids as antitumour agents, pp. 436–44, © 2012, Nature Publishing Group.

629

630

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

insight into the specific signaling events downstream of ceramide that are activated in cancer cells
by cannabinoids (Carracedo et al. 2006b). THC acutely upregulates the expression of the stressregulated protein p8 (also named NUPR1), a transcriptional regulator that has been implicated
in the control of tumorigenesis and tumor progression (Encinar et al. 2001), together with several
of its downstream targets such as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related transcription
factors ATF4 and CHOP, and the pseudokinase tribbles-homologue 3 (TRIB3) (Carracedo et al.
2006b) (Fig. 35.1).
ER stress, as induced by different anticancer agents, can also lead through different mechanisms
(Verfaillie et al. 2010) to the stimulation of autophagy, an essential cellular process participating in a number of physiological functions within the cell (Mizushima et al. 2008; Verfaillie
et al. 2010). During autophagy organelles and other cytoplasmic components are engulfed within
double-membrane vesicles designated autophagosomes. The maturation of these vesicles involves
their fusion with lysosomes, which leads in turn to the degradation of the autophagosome components by lysosomal enzymes (Mizushima et al. 2008). Autophagy is primarily a cytoprotective
mechanism, although its activation can also lead to cell death (Eisenberg-Lerner et al. 2009;
Mizushima et al. 2008). Indeed, THC-triggered stimulation of the p8-regulated pathway enhances
the inhibitory interaction of TRIB3 with a prosurvival kinase, AKT which leads to the inhibition
of the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and the subsequent stimulation of
autophagy-mediated cell death (Salazar et al. 2009) (Fig. 35.1). Cannabinoids induce autophagy in
different types of cancer cells in culture, and pharmacological or genetic inhibition of autophagy
prevents cannabinoid antitumor action in different animal models of cancer (Fig. 35.1), thus
demonstrating that autophagy is important for cannabinoid antineoplastic activity (Salazar
et al. 2009; Vara et al. 2011). Moreover, autophagy blockade prevents cannabinoid-induced apoptosis and cell death whereas apoptosis blockade prevents cannabinoid-induced cell death but
not autophagy (Salazar et al. 2009; Vara et al. 2011). This indicates that autophagy is upstream of
apoptosis in the mechanism of cannabinoid-induced cell death (Fig. 35.1).
The direct participation of the p8-mediated autophagy pathway in the antitumor action of cannabinoids has been clearly demonstrated in glioma cells and pancreatic and hepatic cancer cells
(Carracedo et al. 2006a, 2006b; Salazar et al. 2009; Vara et al. 2011). At least part of this signaling
route has also been found to be upregulated on cannabinoid treatment in other types of cancer
cells. This suggests that—with some variations—this could be a general mechanism by which
activation of CB1 and CB2 receptors promotes cancer cell death.
Additional mechanisms may nonetheless cooperate with the p8-mediated autophagy pathway
to evoke cancer cell death (Fig. 35.1). For example, in hepatocellular carcinoma cells, cannabinoids can trigger an ER stress-dependent activation of AMPK that cooperates with the TRIB3mediated inhibition of the AKT–mTORC1 axis in the stimulation of autophagy-mediated cell
death (Vara et al. 2011). In melanoma (Blazquez et al. 2006), breast carcinoma (Caffarel et al.
2006, 2012), and prostate carcinoma (Sarfaraz et al. 2006) cells cannabinoids can induce cell cycle
arrest in concert with apoptosis (Blazquez et al. 2006; Caffarel et al. 2006; Sarfaraz et al. 2006). Of
note, cannabinoid antiproliferative action—at least in melanoma (Blazquez et al. 2006) and breast
cancer (Caffarel et al. 2006) cells—also relies on AKT inhibition.
Likewise, the effect of cannabinoids in hormone-dependent tumors may rely, at least in part,
on their ability to interfere with the activation of growth factor receptors (Guzmán 2003; Sarfaraz
et al. 2008). Some of these and other mechanisms (Guindon et al. 2011) may participate in the
cytotoxic action of cannabinoids in different types of cancer cells together with the autophagymediated cell death pathway. However, further investigation is required to clarify this issue
(Box 35.2).

Cancer

Box 35.2 Mechanism of cannabinoid receptor-mediated cancer
cell death: some important unanswered questions
Research conducted during the last few years has shed light onto the intracellular signaling
mechanisms underlying cannabinoid anticancer action. However, a number of important
observations—in particular ones related to the role played by cannabinoid receptors in the
triggering of these signals—remain to be clarified. For example:
◆

◆

◆

Unlike the cell death-promoting action of cannabinoids on cancer cells, the viability of normal (non-transformed) cells is unaffected or—under certain conditions—even enhanced
by cannabinoid challenge (Carracedo et al. 2006b; Galve-Roperh et al. 2000, 2008; Gomez
del Pulgar et al. 2002; Salazar et al. 2009). For example, THC treatment of astrocytes (a
cell type that expresses functional CB1 receptors) does not trigger the activation of ER
stress, the upregulation of the p8 pathway, the inhibition of the AKT–mTORC1 axis or the
stimulation of autophagy and apoptosis, even when concentrations of THC higher than
those that promote glioma cell death are used (Carracedo et al. 2006b; Salazar et al. 2009).
Similar results were obtained with primary embryonic fibroblasts (Carracedo et al. 2006a;
Salazar et al. 2009) and other types of nontransformed cells expressing functional cannabinoid receptors when compared with their transformed counterparts (Blazquez et al.
2006; Caffarel et al. 2006; Casanova et al. 2003; Chan et al. 1996). Thus, stimulation of cannabinoid receptors seems to be coupled to the activation of different signaling mechanisms
in transformed and nontransformed cells. The precise molecular reasons for this different
behavior remain as an important open question in the cannabinoid field.
Another intriguing observation is that, in some types of cancer cells, such as glioma cells,
pharmacological blockade of either CB1 or CB2 receptors prevents cannabinoid-induced
cell death with similar efficacy (Galve-Roperh et al. 2000; Lorente et al. 2011), while in
other types of cancer cells, for example, pancreatic (Carracedo et al. 2006b), breast (Caffarel
et al. 2006), or hepatic (Vara et al. 2011) carcinoma cells, antagonists of CB2 but not of CB1
receptors inhibit cannabinoid antitumor actions. Why the receptor type through which
cannabinoids produce their antitumor action depends on the type of cancer cell studied
has yet to be established.
Some cannabinoid receptor agonists promote cancer cell death more efficiently than other
agonists that exhibit similar or even higher affinity for CB1 or CB2 receptors. For example,
THC promotes cancer cell death in a CB1- and/or CB2-dependent manner at lower concentrations than the synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonist WIN 55,212-2, although the latter
agent displays significantly higher affinity for CB1 and CB2 receptors in binding assays
(Pertwee et al. 2010).

Further work aimed at investigating, for example, CB receptor homo or hetero-oligomerization
in response to different cannabinoid agonists, their association with specific domains in the
plasma membrane such as lipid rafts, changes in the subcellular location of CB receptors, and the
selective coupling to different G proteins and other signaling proteins will be essential to answer
these questions and precisely define the role played by each cannabinoid receptor type as an
anticancer signaling platform.

631

632

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Of note, cannabidiol (CBD), a phytocannabinoid with low affinity for cannabinoid receptors
(Pertwee 2009), and other marijuana-derived cannabinoids (Ligresti et al. 2006) have also been
proposed to promote the apoptotic death of cancer cells acting independently of CB1 and CB2
receptors. The mechanism by which CBD produces this effect has not been completely clarified as
yet, but seems to rely—at least in part—on its ability to enhance the production of reactive oxygen
species in cancer cells (Massi et al. 2008; Shrivastava et al. 2011). It has also been proposed that
CBD may activate TRPV2 receptors to promote glioma cell death (Nabissi et al. 2012).
35.3.2 Inhibition of angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis

In cancer cells, cannabinoids block the activation of the vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) pathway, an inducer of angiogenesis. Specifically, different elements of this cascade, such
as the main ligand (VEGF) and the active forms of its main receptors (VEGFR1 and VEGFR2),
are downregulated on cannabinoid treatment of skin carcinomas (Casanova et al. 2003), gliomas
(Blazquez et al. 2003, 2004), and thyroid carcinomas (Portella et al. 2003). In vascular endothelial
cells, cannabinoid receptor activation inhibits proliferation and migration, and induces apoptosis
(Blazquez et al. 2003; Pisanti et al. 2007). These and perhaps other cannabinoid-evoked actions
result in a normalized tumor vasculature; that is, smaller and/or fewer vessels that are more differentiated and less leaky.
Likewise, cannabinoids reduce the formation of distant tumor masses in animal models of both
induced and spontaneous metastasis and inhibit adhesion, migration, and invasiveness of glioma
(Blazquez et al. 2008), breast (Grimaldi et al. 2006; Qamri et al. 2009), lung (Preet et al. 2008;
Ramer et al. 2008), and cervical (Ramer et al. 2008) cancer cells in culture. These effects depend,
at least in part, on the modulation of extracellular proteases (such as matrix metalloproteinase 2
(MMP2)) (Blazquez et al. 2008) and their inhibitors (such as tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases 1 (TIMP1)) (Ramer et al. 2008).
Of note, pharmacological inhibition of ceramide biosynthesis abrogates the antitumor and
antiangiogenic effect of cannabinoids in glioma xenografts, and decreases VEGF production by
glioma cells in vitro and in vivo (Blazquez et al. 2004). Likewise, inhibition of MMP-2 expression
and glioma cell invasion is prevented by blocking ceramide biosynthesis and by knocking-down
p8 expression (Blazquez et al. 2008). Although further research is still necessary to precisely
define the molecular mechanisms responsible for these actions of cannabinoids, these observations indicate that the ceramide/p8-regulated pathway plays a general role in the antitumor activity of cannabinoids targeting CB1 and CB2 receptors.
It is worth noting that CBD, by acting independently of CB1 and CB2 receptors, produces a
remarkable antitumor effect—including reduction of invasiveness and metastasis—in different
animal models of cancer. This effect of CBD seems to rely—at least in part—on the downregulation of the helix-loop-helix transcription factor inhibitor of DNA binding-1 (ID-1) (McAllister
et al. 2011; Soroceanu et al. 2012).
35.3.3 Regulation of antitumor immunity

Of note, stimulation of cannabinoid receptors may lead to important changes in the processes
that regulate antitumor immunity. Thus, for example, treatment of mice with THC triggers a shift
(from Th1 to Th2) on the cytokine profile (Lu et al. 2006; McKallip et al. 2005; Newton et al. 2009;
Steffens et al. 2005) and induces mobilization of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (Hegde et al.
2010), two events that play a critical role in the suppression of antitumor immunity. In agreement

Cancer

with this notion, stimulation of CB2 receptors has been proposed in some reports to enhance
tumorigenesis by interfering with tumor surveillance by the immune system (McKallip et al. 2005;
Zhu et al. 2000). By contrast, cannabinoids may also enhance immune system-mediated tumor
surveillance in some contexts: the antitumor action of WIN 55212-2 (a CB1/CB2-mixed agonist)
or JWH-133 (a CB2-selective agonist) was more pronounced in melanoma xenografts generated
in immunocompetent mice compared with those in immunodeficient mice (Blazquez et al. 2006).
This also indicates that, at least in this model, stimulation of CB2 receptors primarily inhibits
tumor growth through direct effects on cancer cells rather than necessarily through interfering
with the normal antitumor function of the immune system. In line with this idea, treatment for 2
years of immunocompetent rats with very high doses (50 mg/kg/day five times a week) of THC
decreased the incidence of several types of tumors and enhanced the overall survival of these
animals (Chan et al. 1996). These observations might be related to the ability of THC to reduce
inflammation (Burstein et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2010), an effect that may prevent certain types of cancer (Liu et al. 2010). For cannabinoid use to be clinically successful, antitumor effects will need to
overcome immunosuppressive (potentially tumor-promoting) effects. Additional studies should
clarify this issue. For example, it could be conceivable to study the effect of cannabinoid administration on the generation and progression of tumors exhibiting different sensitivity to cannabinoids and generated in immunocompetent or immunodeficient mice in which the expression of
CB1 and/or CB2 receptors in cells from the immune system has been genetically manipulated.

35.4 Resistance mechanisms
Numerous studies have contributed to our appreciation of the heterogeneity of cancer, whereby
each subtype of cancer, and even each individual tumor, exhibits a series of molecular characteristics that determines its behavior and, in particular, its responsiveness to different anticancer
drugs. In agreement with this line of reasoning, a recent report investigated the molecular features
associated with the resistance of a collection of human glioma cell lines and primary cultures
to cannabinoid antitumor action (Lorente et al. 2011). This study showed that, although the
apoptotic effect of THC on glioma cells relied on the stimulation of cannabinoid receptors and
the activation the p8-mediated autophagy pathway, the differences in the sensitivity to THCinduced cell death correlated with the enhanced expression of a particular set of genes in the
THC-resistant glioma cells rather than with the presence of different expression levels of CB1
or CB2 receptors (Lorente et al. 2011). Of interest, upregulation of one of these genes, midkine
(MDK), that encodes a growth factor that has been previously associated with increased malignancy and resistance to anticancer therapies in several types of tumors (Kadomatsu 2005; Mirkin
et al. 2005), correlates with a lower overall survival of patients with glioblastoma (Lorente et al.
2011). Moreover, MDK plays a direct role in the resistance to THC action via stimulation of the
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) (Palmer et al. 2009). Thus, the stimulation of ALK by MDK
inhibits the THC-evoked autophagy-mediated cell death pathway. Further research should clarify
whether this mechanism could also be responsible for the resistance of cancer cells expressing
high levels of MDK to other therapies. Interestingly, in vivo silencing of MDK or pharmacological inhibition of ALK in a mouse xenograft model abolishes the resistance to THC treatment of
established tumors derived from cannabinoid-resistant glioma cells (Lorente et al. 2011).
Taken together, these findings support the idea that stimulation of the MDK–ALK axis promotes resistance to THC antitumor action in gliomas and could help to set the basis for the potential clinical use of THC in combination with inhibitors of this axis (Fig. 35.2). In line with this
idea, ALK inhibitors have started to be used in clinical trials for the management of non-small-cell

633

634

Some Potential Therapeutic Targets for Phytocannabinoids

+ Anti-GF Abs
(Anti-MDK)
(Anti-VEGF?)
Cannabinoids

+ RTK inhibitors
(ALK inhibitors)
(EGFR inhibitors?)
MDK

+ Selective silencing of
resistance factors

EGFR

ALK

CB1, CB 2

+ Classical
chemotherapeutic
drugs (TMZ)

AREG

Ceramide

ER stress

ERK
p8
TRIB3

+ ER stress/autophagy
inducers

AKT

+ Inhibitors of the
AKT/mTORC1 axis
mTORC1

Autophagy

Apoptosis

Fig. 35.2 (See also colour plate section.) Possible strategies aimed at optimizing cannabinoidbased therapies against gliomas. Glioblastoma is highly resistant to current anticancer therapies
(Lonardi et al. 2005; Nieder et al. 2006; Purow et al. 2009). Specifically, resistance of glioma cells
to cannabinoid-­induced cell death relies, at least in part, on the enhanced expression of the growth
factor midkine (MDK) and the subsequent activation of the anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine
kinase (ALK) (Lorente et al. 2011). Likewise, enhanced expression of the heparin-bound EGFR-ligand
amphiregulin (AREG) can promote resistance to THC antitumor action via ERK stimulation (Lorente
et al. 2009). Combination of THC with pharmacological inhibitors of ALK (or genetic inhibition
of MDK) enhances cannabinoid action in resistant tumors, which provides the rationale for the
design of targeted therapies capable of increasing cannabinoid antineoplastic activity (Lorente et al.
2011). Combinations of cannabinoids with classical chemotherapeutic drugs such as the alkylating
agent temozolomide (TMZ; the benchmark agent for the management of glioblastoma (Lonardi
et al. 2005; Stupp et al. 2005)) have been shown to produce a strong anticancer action in animal
models (Torres et al. 2011). Combining cannabinoids and TMZ is thus a very attractive possibility
for clinical studies aimed at investigating cannabinoids antitumor effects in glioblastoma. Other
potentially interesting strategies to enhance cannabinoid anticancer action (still requiring additional
experimental support from data obtained using preclinical models) could be combining cannabinoids with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and/or autophagy inducers or with inhibitors of the
AKT–­mechanistic target of rapamycin C1 (mTORC1) axis. Abs: antibodies; EGFR: epidermal growth
factor receptor; ERK: extracellular signal-regulated kinase; GF: growth factors; RTK: receptor tyrosine
kinase; TRIB3: tribbles 3; VEGF: vascular endothelial growth factor.
Reproduced from Nature Reviews Cancer, 12(6) Velasco G., Sánchez C. and Guzmán M., Towards the use of cannabinoids as antitumour agents, pp. 436–44, © 2012, Nature Publishing Group.

Cancer

lung cancer and other types of tumors (de Bono et al. 2010; Grande et al. 2011). Future research
should clarify whether this mechanism of resistance to cannabinoid action operates in other
types of tumors. In agreement with this possibility, MDK silencing enhanced the sensitivity of
cannabinoid-resistant pancreatic cancer cells to THC-induced cell death (Lorente et al. 2011).
The release by cancer cells of other growth factors has also been implicated in the mechanism
of resistance to cannabinoid antitumor action. Thus, increased expression of the heparin-bound
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) ligand amphiregulin is associated with enhanced resistance to THC antitumor action in glioma xenografts (Lorente et al. 2009). Of note, illustrating that
the dose of cannabinoids could be crucial for their optimal therapeutic effect, low (submicromolar) concentrations of THC or other synthetic cannabinoid agonists enhance the proliferation
of several cancer cell lines in vitro. This effect relies on the activation of the protease ADAM17,
the shedding of heparin-bound EGFR ligands, including amphiregulin, and the subsequent
stimulation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and AKT pathways (Hart et al. 2004).
In line with this idea, a recent report has shown that treatment with the synthetic cannabinoid,
CP-55,940, increases the proliferation of murine glioma cells engineered to express CB1 or CB2
receptors only when these receptors were coupled to AKT activation (Cudaback et al. 2010).
Although a protumorigenic effect has not been observed on the growth of tumor xenografts
generated with glioma cells and treated with low doses of THC (Torres et al. 2011), increased
expression of amphiregulin promotes resistance to THC antitumor action through a mechanism
that involves the EGFR-dependent stimulation of ERK and the subsequent inhibition of p8 and
TRB3 expression. Likewise, pharmacological inhibition of EGFR, ERK (Lorente et al. 2009) or
AKT (authors’ unpublished observations) enhances the cell death-promoting action of THC in
cultures of glioma cells. These observations suggest that targeting EGFR and the AKT and ERK
pathways could enhance the antitumor effect of cannabinoids.

35.5 Cannabinoid-based combinational therapies
The use of combinational anticancer therapies has a number of theoretical advantages over singleagent-based strategies as they allow the simultaneous targeting of tumor growth, progression, and
spreading at different levels. In line with this idea, recent observations suggest that the combined
administration of cannabinoids with other anticancer drugs acts synergistically to reduce tumor
growth. For example, the administration of THC and temozolomide (the benchmark agent for
the management of glioblastoma) exerts a strong antitumor action in glioma xenografts, an effect
that is also evident in temozolomide-resistant tumors (Torres et al. 2011). Of interest, no toxicity
was observed in mice treated with combinations of THC and temozolomide (Torres et al. 2011).
As most patients with glioblastoma undergo temozolomide treatment, these findings indicate
that the combined administration of temozolomide and cannabinoids could be therapeutically
exploited for the management of glioblastoma (Fig. 35.2).
Likewise, another study has recently shown that the combined administration of gemcitabine
(the benchmark agent for the treatment of pancreatic cancer) and different cannabinoid agonists synergistically reduces the viability of pancreatic cancer cells (Donadelli et al. 2011). Other
reports indicate that anandamide and HU-210 may also enhance the anticancer activity of paclitaxel (Miyato et al. 2009) and 5-fluorouracil (Gustafsson et al. 2009), respectively.
An additional approach has been to combine THC with CBD, a phytocannabinoid that
­reduces—although to a lower extent than THC—the growth of several types of tumor xenografts
through a still poorly defined mechanism (Massi et al. 2006; McAllister et al. 2007; Shrivastava
et al. 2011). Combined administration of THC and CBD enhances the anticancer activity of THC

635

636

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

and reduces the doses of THC needed to induce its tumor growth-inhibiting activity (Marcu et al.
2010; Torres et al. 2011). Moreover, the combination of THC and CBD together with temozolomide produces a striking reduction in the growth of glioma xenografts even when low doses
of THC are used (Torres et al. 2011). Of note, CBD has also been shown to alleviate some of the
undesired effects of THC administration, such as convulsions, discoordination and psychotic
events, and therefore improves the tolerability of cannabis-based medicines (Pertwee 2009). As
mentioned earlier, Cannabis sativa produces approximately 108 different cannabinoids and, apart
from CBD, some of the other cannabinoids present in marijuana might attenuate the psychoactive
side effects of THC or even produce other therapeutic benefits (Pertwee 2009). Thus, we think
that clinical studies aimed at analyzing the efficacy of cannabinoids as antitumor agents should
be based on the use both of pure substances, such as THC and CBD, and of cannabis extracts
containing controlled amounts of THC, CBD, and other cannabinoids.

35.6 Clinical antitumor effects of cannabinoids
Although the clinical approval of cannabinoids is largely restricted to palliative uses in various
diseases, following promising preclinical data, the antitumor effects of cannabinoids are beginning to be clinically assessed. In a pilot Phase 1 clinical study, nine patients with actively growing
recurrent glioblastoma that had previously failed standard therapy underwent intracranial THC
administration (Guzmán et al. 2006). Under these conditions cannabinoid delivery was safe and
could be achieved without significant unwanted effects. In addition, although no statistically
significant conclusions can be extracted from a cohort of nine patients, the results obtained in
that study suggested that some patients responded—at least partially—to THC treatment in
terms of decreased tumor growth rate, as evaluated by magnetic resonance imaging (Guzmán

Box 35.3 Different pharmacological approaches to target
cancer cells with cannabinoids
Cannabinoid agonists or enhancers of endocannabinoid tone?
Administration of endocannabinoids or inhibitors of endocannabinoid-degrading enzymes
has been shown to reduce the growth of different types of tumor xenografts (Bifulco et al.
2001; Ligresti et al. 2003) and, therefore, could be a reasonable strategy for targeting cannabinoid receptors for anticancer purposes. However, as discussed in Box 35.1, the role of the
endocannabinoid system, including the endocannabinoid-degrading enzymes, in the control
of tumor generation and progression is not well understood. Since enhancing endocannabinoid tone only has mild antitumor effects in mice and since no inhibitor of endocannabinoid
degradation has been approved as yet for use in humans, clinical studies aimed at analyzing
the efficacy of cannabinoids as antitumor agents should be based on the use of plant-derived
or synthetic agonists of cannabinoid receptors rather than on endocannabinoids or inhibitors
of endocannabinoid degradation.

Cannabis extracts or pure cannabinoids?
The long-known therapeutic properties of Cannabis sativa—including amelioration of symptoms associated with cancer and its chemotherapy—have led to the authorization of the

Cancer

Box 35.3 Different pharmacological approaches to target cancer cells with cannabinoids
(continued)

medical use of this plant and its extracts in several countries. As mentioned in the text, C.
sativa produces about 108 different cannabinoids, including THC and CBD. Some of the other
cannabinoids present in marijuana may contribute to the attenuation of THC psychoactive
side effects or even to the production of other therapeutic benefits (Pertwee 2009). However,
pure drugs are more prone to standardization than complex molecular cocktails. Thus, it
would be ideal that studies aimed at investigating the anticancer actions of cannabinoids in
patients were performed comparatively with both pure substances and cannabis extracts containing controlled amounts of THC, CBD, and other cannabinoids.

Which routes of cannabinoid administration?
The most widely used route of administration of recreational and self-medicated marijuana
is smoking. Although THC and other phytocannabinoids are rapidly absorbed by inhalation,
smoking is an unattractive clinical option. Preclinical work in animal models has typically
administered cannabinoids intra peritumorally. Likewise, in the only clinical trial in which a
cannabinoid has been assayed as an antitumor agent, THC was administered locally (intracranial delivery to GBM patients) (Guzmán et al. 2006). Nevertheless, this route of administration
has many obvious limitations. Currently available cannabis-based medicines are administered
as capsules or using an oromucosal spray (Pertwee 2009). Preclinical animal models have
yielded data indicating that systemic (oral or intraperitoneal) administration of cannabinoids
effectively reduces tumor growth (authors’ unpublished observations), so it seems reasonable
that future clinical studies directed at determining the efficacy of cannabinoids as antitumor
agents use oral or oromucosal routes of administration.
et al. 2006). Importantly, analyses of samples obtained from two patients in this study before
and after THC administration indicate that the molecular mechanism of cannabinoid antitumor
action delineated in the previous sections, namely p8 and TRIB3 upregulation (Carracedo et al.
2006b; Salazar et al. 2009), mTORC1 inhibition (Salazar et al. 2009), stimulation of autophagy
and apoptosis (Carracedo et al. 2006a; Guzmán et al. 2006; Salazar et al. 2009), inhibition of cell
proliferation(Guzmán et al. 2006), decreased VEGF signaling (Blazquez et al. 2004), and MMP-2
downregulation (Blazquez et al. 2008), also operates in cancer patients. These findings were
encouraging and reinforced the interest on the potential use of cannabinoids in cancer therapies.
However, they also highlighted the need for further research aimed at optimizing the use of cannabinoids in terms of patient selection, combination with other anticancer agents, and use of
other routes of administration (see Box 35.3).

35.7 Conclusions and future directions
It is widely believed that strategies aimed at reducing mortality from cancer should consist of targeted therapies capable of providing the most efficacious and selective treatment for each individual tumor and patient. Thus, the major focus of anticancer-drug development has progressively
moved from nonspecific chemotherapies to molecularly targeted inhibitors. However, despite
the huge amount of preclinical literature on how these rationally designed compounds work, the
advance in the use of most of these drugs in the clinical practice is still limited.

637

638

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

How do cannabinoid-based medicines fit into this ongoing scenario? Let us consider gliomas,
the type of cancer on which the most detailed cannabinoid research has been conducted to date.
As discussed earlier, engagement of a molecular target (CB receptors) by a family of selective
drugs (THC and other cannabinoid agonists) inhibits tumor growth in animal models through
a well-established mechanism of action that seems to operate in patients. Moreover, cannabinoids potentiate the antitumor efficacy of temozolomide and ALK inhibitors in mice harboring
gliomas. These findings provide preclinical proof-of-concept that “cannabinoid sensitizers” could
improve the clinical efficacy of classical cytotoxic drugs in glioblastoma (Fig. 35.2) and perhaps
other highly malignant tumors such as pancreatic cancer, melanoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma. However, further research is required to define the precise molecular cross-talk between
cannabinoids and chemotherapeutic drugs and to optimize the pharmacology of preclinical
cannabinoid-based combinational therapies.
Regarding patient stratification, we should unequivocally determine which particular individuals are potentially responsive to cannabinoid administration. For this purpose, high-throughput
approaches should be implemented to find cannabinoid therapy-associated biomarkers in tumor
biopsies or, ideally, in easily-acquired fluids containing circulating cancer cells or enhanced levels of resistance factors that could have been released by cancer cells. These biomarkers would
conceivably relate to cannabinoid pharmacodynamics—namely expression and activity of cannabinoid receptors and their downstream cell death-inducing effectors. This would be analogous
to the biochemical evaluation of estrogen and ERBB2 receptors, which predict the benefit from
endocrine therapies and trastuzumab, respectively, in breast cancer. Predictive markers to define
the sensitivity of a particular tumor to cannabinoid-based therapies could also include the status
of growth factors, such as MDK in gliomas, as well as their receptors and signaling partners.
In conclusion, cannabinoids induce tumor cell death and inhibit tumor angiogenesis and invasion in animal models of cancer and there are indications that they do so as well in patients with
glioblastoma. As cannabinoids show an acceptable safety profile, clinical trials testing them as
single drugs or, ideally, in combination therapies in glioblastoma and other types of cancer are
both warranted and urgently needed.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness
(MINECO) (PI12/02248, FR2009-0052, and IT2009-0053 to GV; and PI11/00295 to CS),
Comunidad de Madrid (S2011/BMD-2308 to MG), GW Pharmaceuticals (to GV, CS, and MG),
and Fundación Mutua Madrileña (AP101042012 to GV).

Potential conflict of interest
We declare that GW Pharmaceuticals funded part of the research of our laboratory. Likewise,
part of the data obtained by the authors in relation with the antitumor action of cannabinoids is
included in three patent applications presented by GW Pharmaceuticals.

References
Atwood, B.K. and Mackie, K. (2010). CB2: a cannabinoid receptor with an identity crisis. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 160, 467–479.
Bifulco, M., Laezza, C., Portella, G., et al. (2001). Control by the endogenous cannabinoid system of ras
oncogene-dependent tumor growth. FASEB Journal, 15, 2745–2747.
Blazquez, C., Carracedo, A., Barrado, L., et al. (2006). Cannabinoid receptors as novel targets for the treatment of melanoma. FASEB Journal, 20, 2633–2635.

Cancer

Blazquez, C., Casanova, M.L., Planas, A., et al. (2003). Inhibition of tumor angiogenesis by cannabinoids.
FASEB Journal, 17, 529–531.
Blazquez, C., Gonzalez-Feria, L., Alvarez, L., et al. (2004). Cannabinoids inhibit the vascular endothelial
growth factor pathway in gliomas. Cancer Research, 64, 5617–5623.
Blazquez, C., Salazar, M., Carracedo, A., et al. (2008). Cannabinoids inhibit glioma cell invasion by downregulating matrix metalloproteinase-2 expression. Cancer Research, 68, 1945–1952.
Burstein, S.H. and Zurier, R.B. (2009). Cannabinoids, endocannabinoids, and related analogs in inflammation. AAPS Journal, 11, 109–119.
Caffarel, M.M., Andradas, C., Perez-Gomez, E., Guzmán, M., and Sánchez, C. (2012). Cannabinoids: a
new hope for breast cancer therapy? Cancer Treatment Reviews, 38, 911–918.
Caffarel, M.M., Moreno-Bueno, G., Cerutti, C., et al. (2008). JunD is involved in the antiproliferative effect
of Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on human breast cancer cells. Oncogene, 27, 5033–5044.
Caffarel, M.M., Sarrio, D., Palacios, J., Guzmán, M., and Sánchez, C. (2006). Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol
inhibits cell cycle progression in human breast cancer cells through Cdc2 regulation. Cancer Research,
66, 6615–6621.
Carracedo, A., Gironella, M., Lorente, M., et al. (2006a). Cannabinoids induce apoptosis of pancreatic
tumor cells via endoplasmic reticulum stress-related genes. Cancer Research, 66, 6748–6755.
Carracedo, A., Lorente, M., Egia, A., et al. (2006b). The stress-regulated protein p8 mediates cannabinoidinduced apoptosis of tumor cells. Cancer Cell, 9, 301–312.
Casanova, M.L., Blazquez, C., Martinez-Palacio, J., et al. (2003). Inhibition of skin tumor growth and
angiogenesis in vivo by activation of cannabinoid receptors. The Journal of Clinical Investigation, 111,
43–50.
Cudaback, E., Marrs, W., Moeller, T., and Stella, N. (2010). The expression level of CB1 and CB2 receptors
determines their efficacy at inducing apoptosis in astrocytomas. PLoS One, 5, e8702.
Chan, P.C., Sills, R.C., Braun, A.G., Haseman, J.K., and Bucher, J.R. (1996). Toxicity and carcinogenicity
of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in Fischer rats and B6C3F1 mice. Fundamental and Applied Toxicology,
30, 109–117.
De Bono, J.S. and Ashworth, A. (2010). Translating cancer research into targeted therapeutics. Nature, 467,
543–549.
Devane, W.A., Hanus, L., Breuer, A., et al. (1992). Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds
to the cannabinoid receptor. Science, 258, 1946–1949.
Donadelli, M., Dando, I., Zaniboni, T., et al. (2011). Gemcitabine/cannabinoid combination triggers
autophagy in pancreatic cancer cells through a ROS-mediated mechanism. Cell Death and Disease, 2,
e152.
Du, K., Herzig, S., Kulkarni, R.N., and Montminy, M. (2003). TRB3: a tribbles homolog that inhibits Akt/
PKB activation by insulin in liver. Science, 300, 1574–1577.
Eisenberg-Lerner, A., Bialik, S., Simon, H.U., and Kimchi, A. (2009). Life and death partners: apoptosis,
autophagy and the cross-talk between them. Cell Death and Differentiation, 16, 966–975.
Ellert-Miklaszewska, A., Kaminska, B., and Konarska, L. (2005). Cannabinoids down-regulate PI3K/Akt
and Erk signalling pathways and activate proapoptotic function of Bad protein. Cell Signal, 17, 25–37.
Encinar, J.A., Mallo, G.V., Mizyrycki, C., et al. (2001). Human p8 is a HMG-I/Y-like protein with DNA
binding activity enhanced by phosphorylation. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 276, 2742–2751.
Fernandez-Ruiz, J., Romero, J., Velasco, G., et al. (2007). Cannabinoid CB2 receptor: a new target for controlling neural cell survival? Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 28, 39–45.
Galve-Roperh, I., Aguado, T., Palazuelos, J., and Guzmán, M. (2008). Mechanisms of control of neuron
survival by the endocannabinoid system. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 14, 2279–2288.
Galve-Roperh, I., Sánchez, C., Cortes, M.L., et al. (2000). Anti-tumoral action of cannabinoids: involvement of sustained ceramide accumulation and extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation. Nature
Medicine, 6, 313–319.

639

640

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964). Isolation, structure and partial synthesis of an active constituent of
hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86, 1646–1647.
Gomez del Pulgar, T., Velasco, G., Sánchez, C., Haro, A., and Guzmán, M. (2002). De novo-synthesized
ceramide is involved in cannabinoid-induced apoptosis. Biochemical Journal, 363, 183–188.
Grande, E., Bolos, M.V., and Arriola, E. (2011). Targeting oncogenic ALK: a promising strategy for cancer
treatment. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics, 10, 569–579.
Grimaldi, C., Pisanti, S., Laezza, C., et al. (2006). Anandamide inhibits adhesion and migration of breast
cancer cells. Experimental Cell Research, 312, 363–373.
Guindon, J. and Hohmann, A.G. (2011). The endocannabinoid system and cancer: therapeutic implication. British Journal of Pharmacology, 163, 1447–1463.
Gustafsson, S.B., Lindgren, T., Jonsson, M., and Jacobsson, S.O. (2009). Cannabinoid receptor-independent
cytotoxic effects of cannabinoids in human colorectal carcinoma cells: synergism with 5-fluorouracil.
Cancer Chemotherapy and Pharmacology, 63, 691–701.
Guzmán, M. (2003). Cannabinoids: potential anticancer agents. Nature Reviews Cancer, 3, 745–755.
Guzmán, M., Duarte, M.J., Blazquez, C., et al. (2006). A pilot clinical study of Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol in patients with recurrent glioblastoma multiforme. British Journal of Cancer, 95,
197–203.
Hart, S., Fischer, O.M., and Ullrich, A. (2004). Cannabinoids induce cancer cell proliferation via tumor
necrosis factor alpha-converting enzyme (TACE/ADAM17)-mediated transactivation of the epidermal
growth factor receptor. Cancer Research, 64, 1943–1950.
Hegde, V.L., Nagarkatti, M., and Nagarkatti, P.S. (2010). Cannabinoid receptor activation leads to massive
mobilization of myeloid-derived suppressor cells with potent immunosuppressive properties. European
Journal of Immunology, 40, 3358–3371.
Herrera, B., Carracedo, A., Diez-Zaera, M., et al. (2006). The CB2 cannabinoid receptor signals apoptosis
via ceramide-dependent activation of the mitochondrial intrinsic pathway. Experimental Cell Research,
312, 2121–2131.
Izzo, A.A., Aviello, G., Petrosino, S., et al. (2008). Increased endocannabinoid levels reduce the development of precancerous lesions in the mouse colon. Journal of Molecular Medicine, 86, 89–98.
Joosten, M., Valk, P.J., Jorda, M.A., et al. (2002). Leukemic predisposition of pSca-1/Cb2 transgenic mice.
Experimental Hematology, 30, 142–149.
Kadomatsu, K. (2005). The midkine family in cancer, inflammation and neural development. Nagoya
Journal of Medical Science, 67, 71–82.
Katona, I. and Freund, T.F. (2008). Endocannabinoid signaling as a synaptic circuit breaker in neurological
disease. Nature Medicine, 14, 923–930.
Ligresti, A., Bisogno, T., Matias, I., et al. (2003). Possible endocannabinoid control of colorectal cancer
growth. Gastroenterology, 125, 677–687.
Ligresti, A., Moriello, A.S., Starowicz, K., et al. (2006). Antitumor activity of plant cannabinoids with
emphasis on the effect of cannabidiol on human breast carcinoma. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 318, 1375–1387.
Liu, W.M., Fowler, D.W., and Dalgleish, A.G. (2010). Cannabis-derived substances in cancer
therapy– an emerging anti-inflammatory role for the cannabinoids. Current Clinical Pharmacology,
5, 281–287.
Lonardi, S., Tosoni, A., and Brandes, A.A. (2005). Adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of high grade
gliomas. Cancer Treatment Reviews, 31, 79–89.
Lorente, M., Carracedo, A., Torres, S., et al. (2009). Amphiregulin is a factor for resistance of glioma cells
to cannabinoid-induced apoptosis. Glia, 57, 1374–1385.
Lorente, M., Torres, S., Salazar, M., et al. (2011). Stimulation of the midkine/ALK axis renders glioma cells
resistant to cannabinoid antitumoral action. Cell Death and Differentiation, 18, 959–973.

Cancer

Lu, T., Newton, C., Perkins, I., Friedman, H., and Klein, T.W. (2006). Cannabinoid treatment suppresses
the T-helper cell-polarizing function of mouse dendritic cells stimulated with Legionella pneumophila
infection. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 319, 269–276.
Malfitano, A.M., Ciaglia, E., Gangemi, G., et al. (2011). Update on the endocannabinoid system as an anticancer target. Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Targets, 15, 297–308.
Marcu, J.P., Christian, R.T., Lau, D., et al. (2010). Cannabidiol enhances the inhibitory effects of delta9tetrahydrocannabinol on human glioblastoma cell proliferation and survival. Molecular Cancer
Therapeutics, 9, 180–189.
Massi, P., Vaccani, A., Bianchessi, S., et al. (2006). The non-psychoactive cannabidiol triggers caspase activation and oxidative stress in human glioma cells. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, 63, 2057–2066.
Massi, P., Valenti, M., Vaccani, A., et al. (2008). 5-Lipoxygenase and anandamide hydrolase (FAAH) mediate the antitumor activity of cannabidiol, a non-psychoactive cannabinoid. Journal of Neurochemistry,
104, 1091–1100.
Matsuda, L.A., Lolait, S.J., Brownstein, M.J., Young, A.C., and Bonner, T.I. (1990). Structure of a cannabinoid receptor and functional expression of the cloned cDNA. Nature, 346, 561–564.
McAllister, S.D., Christian, R.T., Horowitz, M.P., Garcia, A., and Desprez, P.Y. (2007). Cannabidiol as a
novel inhibitor of Id-1 gene expression in aggressive breast cancer cells. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics,
6, 2921–2927.
McAllister, S.D., Murase, R., Christian, R.T., et al. (2011). Pathways mediating the effects of cannabidiol
on the reduction of breast cancer cell proliferation, invasion, and metastasis. Breast Cancer Research and
Treatment, 129, 37–47.
McKallip, R.J., Nagarkatti, M., and Nagarkatti, P.S. (2005). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol enhances
breast cancer growth and metastasis by suppression of the antitumor immune response. The Journal of
Immunology, 174, 3281–3289.
Mechoulam, R., Ben-Shabat, S., Hanus, L., et al. (1995). Identification of an endogenous 2-monoglyceride,
present in canine gut, that binds to cannabinoid receptors. Biochemical Pharmacology, 50, 83–90.
Mirkin, B.L., Clark, S., Zheng, X., et al. (2005). Identification of midkine as a mediator for intercellular
transfer of drug resistance. Oncogene, 24, 4965–4674.
Miyato, H., Kitayama, J., Yamashita, H., et al. (2009). Pharmacological synergism between cannabinoids
and paclitaxel in gastric cancer cell lines. Journal of Surgical Research, 155, 40–47.
Mizushima, N., Levine, B., Cuervo, A.M., and Klionsky, D.J. (2008). Autophagy fights disease through cellular self-digestion. Nature, 451, 1069–1075.
Munro, S., Thomas, K.L., and Abu-Shaar, M. (1993). Molecular characterization of a peripheral receptor
for cannabinoids. Nature, 365, 61–65.
Nabissi, M., Morelli, M.B., Santoni, M., and Santoni, G. (2012). Triggering of the TRPV2 channel by
cannabidiol sensitizes glioblastoma cells to cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents. Carcinogenesis, 34,
48–57.
Newton, C.A., Chou, P.J., Perkins, I., and Klein, T.W. (2009). CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors mediate
different aspects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-induced T helper cell shift following immune
activation by Legionella pneumophila infection. Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology, 4, 92–102.
Nieder, C., Adam, M., Molls, M., and Grosu, A.L. (2006). Therapeutic options for recurrent high-grade
glioma in adult patients: recent advances. Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology, 60, 181–193.
Nomura, D.K., Long, J.Z., Niessen, S., et al. (2010). Monoacylglycerol lipase regulates a fatty acid network
that promotes cancer pathogenesis. Cell, 140, 49–61.
Pacher, P., Batkai, S., and Kunos, G. (2006). The endocannabinoid system as an emerging target of pharmacotherapy. Pharmacological Reviews, 58, 389–462.
Palmer, R.H., Vernersson, E., Grabbe, C., and Hallberg, B. (2009). Anaplastic lymphoma kinase: signalling in development and disease. Biochemical Journal, 420, 345–361.

641

642

SOME POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC TARGETS FOR PHYTOCANNABINOIDS

Pertwee, R.G. (2008). The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology of three plant cannabinoids: Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin. British Journal of Pharmacology,
153, 199–215.
Pertwee, R.G. (2009). Emerging strategies for exploiting cannabinoid receptor agonists as medicines. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 156, 397–411.
Pertwee, R.G., Howlett, A.C., Abood, M.E., et al. (2010). International Union of Basic and Clinical
Pharmacology. LXXIX. Cannabinoid receptors and their ligands: beyond CB1 and CB2. Pharmacological
Reviews, 62, 588–631.
Pisanti, S., Borselli, C., Oliviero, O., et al. (2007). Antiangiogenic activity of the endocannabinoid anandamide: correlation to its tumor-suppressor efficacy. Journal of Cellular Physiology, 211, 495–503.
Portella, G., Laezza, C., Laccetti, P., et al. (2003). Inhibitory effects of cannabinoid CB1 receptor stimulation on tumor growth and metastatic spreading: actions on signals involved in angiogenesis and metastasis. FASEB Journal, 17, 1771–1773.
Preet, A., Ganju, R.K., and Groopman, J.E. (2008). Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol inhibits epithelial growth
factor-induced lung cancer cell migration in vitro as well as its growth and metastasis in vivo. Oncogene,
27, 339–346.
Purow, B. and Schiff, D. (2009). Advances in the genetics of glioblastoma: are we reaching critical mass?
Nature Reviews Neurology, 5, 419–426.
Qamri, Z., Preet, A., Nasser, M.W., et al. (2009). Synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists inhibit tumor
growth and metastasis of breast cancer. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics, 8, 3117–3129.
Ramer, R. and Hinz, B. (2008). Inhibition of cancer cell invasion by cannabinoids via increased expression
of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases-1. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 100, 59–69.
Salazar, M., Carracedo, A., Salanueva, I.J., et al. (2009). Cannabinoid action induces autophagy-mediated
cell death through stimulation of ER stress in human glioma cells. The Journal of Clinical Investigation,
119, 1359–1372.
Sánchez, C., de Ceballos, M.L., del Pulgar, T.G., et al. (2001). Inhibition of glioma growth in vivo by selective activation of the CB2 cannabinoid receptor. Cancer Research, 61, 5784–5789.
Sarfaraz, S., Adhami, V.M., Syed, D.N., Afaq, F., and Mukhtar, H. (2008). Cannabinoids for cancer treatment: progress and promise. Cancer Research, 68, 339–342.
Sarfaraz, S., Afaq, F., Adhami, V.M., Malik, A., and Mukhtar, H. (2006). Cannabinoid receptor agonistinduced apoptosis of human prostate cancer cells LNCaP proceeds through sustained activation of
ERK1/2 leading to G1 cell cycle arrest. The Journal of Biological Chemistry, 281, 39480–39491.
Shrivastava, A., Kuzontkoski, P.M., Groopman, J.E., and Prasad, A. (2011). Cannabidiol induces
programmed cell death in breast cancer cells by coordinating the cross-talk between apoptosis and
autophagy. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics, 10, 1161–1172.
Soroceanu, L., Murase, R., Limbad, C., et al. (2012). Id-1 is a key transcriptional regulator of glioblastoma
aggressiveness and a novel therapeutic target. Cancer Research, 73, 1559–1569.
Steffens, S., Veillard, N.R., Arnaud, C., et al. (2005). Low dose oral cannabinoid therapy reduces progression of atherosclerosis in mice. Nature, 434, 782–786.
Stupp, R., Mason, W.P., van den Bent, M.J., et al. (2005). Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant
temozolomide for glioblastoma. The New England Journal of Medicine, 352, 987–996.
Sugiura, T., Kondo, S., Sukagawa, A., et al. (1995). 2-Arachidonoylglycerol: a possible endogenous cannabinoid receptor ligand in brain. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communication, 215, 89–97.
Thors, L., Bergh, A., Persson, E., et al. (2010). Fatty acid amide hydrolase in prostate cancer: association with disease severity and outcome, CB1 receptor expression and regulation by IL-4. PLoS One, 5,
e12275.
Torres, S., Lorente, M., Rodriguez-Fornes, F., et al. (2011). A combined preclinical therapy of cannabinoids and temozolomide against glioma. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics, 10, 90–103.

Cancer

Vara, D., Salazar, M., Olea-Herrero, N., et al. (2011). Anti-tumoral action of cannabinoids on hepatocellular carcinoma: role of AMPK-dependent activation of autophagy. Cell Death and Differentiation, 18,
1099–1111.
Velasco, G., Sánchez, C. and Guzmán, M. (2012). Towards the use of cannabinoids as antitumour agents.
Nature Reviews Cancer, 12, 436–444.
Verfaillie, T., Salazar, M., Velasco, G. and Agostinis, P. (2010). Linking ER stress to autophagy: potential
implications for cancer therapy. International Journal of Cell Biology, 2010, 930509.
Wang, D., Wang, H., Ning, W., et al. (2008). Loss of cannabinoid receptor 1 accelerates intestinal tumor
growth. Cancer Research, 68, 6468–6476.
Zheng, D., Bode, A.M., Zhao, Q., et al. (2008). The cannabinoid receptors are required for ultravioletinduced inflammation and skin cancer development. Cancer Research, 68, 3992–3998.
Zhu, L.X., Sharma, S., Stolina, M., et al. (2000). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol inhibits antitumor immunity by a CB2 receptor-mediated, cytokine-dependent pathway. The Journal of Immunology, 165, 373–380.

643

Part 6

Recreational Cannabis:
Sought-After Effects, Adverse
Effects, Designer Drugs,
and Harm Minimization
Wayne Hall

Part 6 Overview
The first four chapters in Part 6 deal with what we know about the risks
of cannabis, mainly when it is used by young adults to produce pleasure,
euphoria, relaxation, and enhance sociability. In the four decades since
cannabis first began to be widely used by young people in the US, many
young people now start cannabis use in their mid to late teens, an important
period of psychosocial transition when misadventures arising from chronic
drug intoxication and dependence can adversely affect a young person’s life
by reducing their chances of completing education, developing satisfactory
relationships, and entering the workforce.
In Chapter 36, Curran and Morgan describe the major reasons why young
people use cannabis, namely, to experience euphoria, relaxation, sociability,
heightened appreciation of sensory experiences, eating, sex, and aesthetic
experiences. They also review research on some undesired adverse effects of
cannabis use such as dependence, psychosis, and cognitive impairment.
In Chapter 37, Morrison, Bhattacharyya, and Murray review the
epidemiological and clinical evidence that cannabis use (especially when
initiated in early adolescence and used regularly during young adulthood)
increases the risks of developing schizophrenia. They argue that evidence from
longitudinal studies of young people have ruled out reverse causation and

646

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

tested competing explanations of the association. Experimental provocation
studies have also shown that Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) produces
psychotic symptoms in persons with and without schizophrenia in a dosedependent way.
In Chapter 38, Grotenhermen reviews the non-psychological adverse health
effects of cannabis. These include: the adverse acute effects of cannabis
intoxication on psychomotor performance and the risks of motor vehicle
accidents; the adverse effects of chronic cannabis use that arise from smoking
as a route of administration, such as respiratory and cardiovascular disease,
and from the development of tolerance to the physical and psychological
effects of THC that may lead to dependence. He also considers the effects of
chronic use on the hormonal system and fertility, pregnancy outcomes and
fetal development, and on the immune, gastrointestinal, and other organ
systems.
In Chapter 39, Hall and Degenhardt outline harm minimization strategies
that have been adopted or could be adopted to reduce the harms of cannabis
use in developed countries. These include: roadside drug testing to deter
cannabis-intoxicated driving; education of cannabis users about patterns of
use that increase the risks of dependence, poor mental health, and respiratory
problems; and depenalization and decriminalization of cannabis use to reduce
harms arising from cannabis prohibition.
In the final chapter (Chapter 40), Thomas and colleagues move away from
recreational cannabis to examine the possible adverse public health effects
and the regulatory challenges that are posed by the marketing of cannabinoid
designer drugs over the past decade. These synthetic cannabinoids act
like THC as agonists at the cannabinoid CB1 receptor, although their other
biological effects are not well understood. The desired subjective effects of
these drugs resemble those of herbal cannabis but are often reported to be
more intense. Human pharmacological data are sparse because these drugs
were primarily used in animal research exploring mechanisms of cannabinoid
action. Systematic toxicological data in humans is very sparse.

Chapter 36

Desired and Undesired Effects
of Cannabis on the Human Mind
and Psychological Well-Being
H. Valerie Curran and Celia J.A. Morgan

36.1 Desired effects of cannabis
A small amount consumed in a reefer, bong or pipe induces laughter, hunger, random silliness and
great interest in boring items. Highly recommended for long camping trips, family reunions, first
dates and gloomy Sundays.
Alfred Gingold (1982), US humorist.

For centuries cannabis has been used for various “desired” effects. Getting “stoned” as described
by Gingold is an aim of many of the estimated 166 million people worldwide who use cannabis
recreationally (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2009). In reality, the “stoned” experience can vary enormously, depending on factors such as prior experience of cannabis (D’Souza
et al. 2009), the setting, and the type of cannabis ingested (Morgan et al. 2010c). Common desired
feelings include disinhibition, dreaminess, and a communion with other smokers. Desired sensations reported are heightened awareness of music, sounds, colors, textures, and tastes (Tyler
1986). Cannabis users also often report insights into new meanings, an impulse to utter profundities, to giggle, and to eat a lot (Tyler 1986). Across the centuries many writers and artists have
attempted to describe the cannabis experience. For example, in 1854 the American writer Bayard
Taylor tried the drug on a trip to Egypt and noted:
The sensations it then produced were . . . Mentally of a wonderfully keen perception of the ludicrous
in the most simple and familiar objects . . . the objects by which I was surrounded assumed a strange
whimsical expression . . . I was provoked into a long fit of laughter . . . [the effect] died away as gradually
as it came, leaving me overcome with a soft and pleasant drowsiness, from which I sank into a deep and
refreshing sleep. (Taylor 1854, cf. Grinspoon 1993)

Early records suggest that cannabis was first desired, not for its recreational effects, but rather
its medicinal properties. Analgesic use dates to the Chinese pharmacopoeia of 2800 bc and East
Indian documents in the Athera Veda of about 2000 bc (Gurley et al. 1998). In ancient Greece
and Rome, both the Herbal of Dioscorides and the writings of Galen referred to the medical use
of cannabis (Gurley et al. 1998). Western medicine was much slower to use the plant therapeutically although Culpepper in medieval times mentions it (cf. Carter and Ugalde 2004) and Queen
Victoria was famously prescribed tincture of cannabis to relieve pain related to menstruation and
childbirth.
Today, two cannabis derivatives are licensed in several countries for their desired medical
effects and several more cannabinoids are under investigation (see Chapters 23–26, this volume).

648

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

The main psychoactive ingredient of cannabis which produces the effects that users seek is delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and this is prescribed medically, as dronabinol/Marinol®, for
reduction of chemotherapy-induced nausea and for appetite stimulation in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) patients. THC combined with the second most abundant cannabinoid in cannabis, cannabidiol (CBD), is licensed for muscle spasm in multiple sclerosis. In terms of desired
psychological effects, whilst as yet unlicensed for this use, several studies have demonstrated a
positive impact of CBD alone on anxiety in patients with social anxiety disorder (Bergamaschi
et al. 2011; Guimares et al. 1990; Schier 2012). A further intriguing, potentially highly desirable,
property of CBD appears to be the capacity to reduce psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia
(Leweke et al. 2012), although this work needs replication. Recent evidence also suggests that
CBD may have emerging use as a treatment to modulate memory, by either enhancing fear extinction learning (Das et al. 2013) or blocking “reconsolidation”—the process by which memories are
made labile to allow them to be strengthened or updated or disrupted (Stern et al. 2012). Either
of these approaches makes CBD a candidate treatment for disorders of pathological fear memory,
such as posttraumatic stress disorder and phobias. We have also gathered preliminary data that
suggests that CBD might reduce cigarette smoking (Morgan et al. 2013a), therefore this desired
effect of this constituent of cannabis may also be a candidate for reducing addiction. A recent
review has addressed the broad spectrum of, almost panacea-like, therapeutic uses of CBD, attributing them to a range of neurotransmitter actions (Campos et al. 2012).
In some parts of the US, “medical marijuana” is available on prescription for a wide range
of conditions, particularly chronic pain and anxiety. In a survey of 1000 of these patients prescribed the drug for these two conditions, we found they rated cannabis as more effective and
having fewer side effects than their conventional pharmaceutical medication (Lu et al. in preparation). Other less common conditions that “medical marijuana” is prescribed for include addiction management, bipolar disorder, glaucoma, anorexia, and even writer’s block. Scripts for the
unconventional diagnosis of writer’s block may well reflect a widely held view that this drug can
enhance human creativity. Despite numerous anecdotes from musicians, writers, and other artists, scientific evidence for this has proved elusive, not the least because it is extremely difficult to
empirically define “creativity.” In an early, highly controlled laboratory study of the dose–response
effects of THC, the one positive cognitive effect of the drug was to enhance verbal fluency—the
speed with which an individual could generate words that begin with the same letter (Curran
et al. 2002). This effect was recently replicated in a naturalistic study of individuals smoking their
own chosen variety of cannabis—again the drug acutely increased the number of words generated
(Schafer et al. 2012). Importantly, several days later these users did not differ from control nonusers in fluency, indicating the enhancement was an acute effect of cannabis. A naturalistic study by
Morgan et al. (2010c) suggests that one of marijuana’s properties is an ability to increase semantic
priming, or an individual’s ability to make connections between seemingly unrelated concepts.
However, other studies have found no acute enhancement on a variety of so-called “creativity”
tasks (e.g., Bourasa and Vaugeois 2001) and, given the publication bias against negative findings,
it is likely that many other studies have found no effect. Further, the acute positive effects of the
drug on fluency and semantic priming may reflect the disinhibiting effects of cannabis rather than
a direct creative enhancement.
One way to index a drug’s desired effects is to ask users to rate the comparative benefits of differing recreational compounds. Using this approach, nearly 6000 participants responded to our
international survey by ranking the 15 most common psychotropic drugs used recreationally
(including alcohol and tobacco) on ten potential benefits (Morgan et al. 2013b). Cannabis was
ranked the highest drug for enjoyment and pain relief, and as high as benzodiazepine tranquilizers

Desired and Undesired Effects of Cannabis on the Human Mind and Psychological Well-Being

on relaxation and stress relief. It also ranked amongst the top five drugs in aiding sleep, mood, and
socializing. This concurs with the self-reported effects of cannabis in other studies that suggest
euphoria and relaxation are the most consistently reported acute effects (see Green et al. 2003 for a
review), although a wide variation in self-reported effects, even in the same individuals, has been
reported. It is known that there are marked individual differences such that one person’s feelings
of acute relaxation may contrast with another’s anxiety or paranoia. And the setting in which the
drug is ingested will also influence this. Similarly the undesired effects of this drug show clear
individual and contextual differences. Below we focus on the undesired psychological effects
of cannabis use; unwanted effects on physical health are discussed by Franjo Grotenhermen
(Chapter 38, this volume).

36.2 Undesired effects of cannabis
The undesired effects of cannabis use on the mind and psychological well-being have been much
more widely studied than its desired effects. Four major areas of harm have been the focus of this
research: addiction, cognitive impairment, anxiety and depression, and psychosis. Importantly,
these areas interact and overlap. For example, neurocognitive impairment is a key feature of
both psychosis and addiction and both clinical conditions involve abnormal salience attribution
(Freeman et al. 2012). Further, many individuals with a diagnosis of a psychotic disorder are also
frequent users of drugs like tobacco and cannabis. In the following sections we describe the major
undesired short- and longer-term consequences of cannabis use before considering what makes
an individual more or less vulnerable to those effects.
36.2.1 Cannabis and addiction

The last decade has witnessed increasing concern about a subset of about one in nine recreational users who develop clinically defined cannabis dependence (e.g., Fergusson and Horwood
2000; Hall and Degenhardt 2007; Linszen and van Amelsvoort 2007). Worldwide, around 16–17
million people will meet these clinical criteria in the current psychiatric classification system of
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). This is more than the number
dependent on any other illicit drug.
In Europe, about 1% of all adults and nearly 2% of 14–17-year-olds are addicted to cannabis
(Wittchen et al. 2011; European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA)
2011). Among UK first-time drug treatment clients, the primary addiction is to cannabis in 28%
of cases, second only to heroin (41%) (EMCDDA 2011). Despite evidence that numbers of cannabis users are no longer increasing in several European countries, demand for cannabis treatment
has more than doubled in the UK and throughout Europe since 2001 (United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime 2010). A cannabis withdrawal syndrome is increasingly recognized in treatment studies although this is not seen as clinically significant in current DSM criteria for cannabis
dependence (Budney and Hughes 2006).
As yet, cannabis dependence is a relatively under-researched area with most studies looking
at “recreational” use (usually weekly or monthly). Irrespective of the drug, risk of dependency
increases the more a drug is used, and daily users will be at highest risk. Acute response to cannabis itself may also dictate the risk of dependency: blunted negative and enhanced euphoric
effects may predispose an individual to use the drug more regularly (Ren et al. 2009). Although
various treatments of cannabis dependency have been trialed—including THC itself, gabapentin,
and venlafaxine (Mason et al. 2012; Levin et al. 2013)—there is still no effective pharmacological
treatment of cannabis dependency. This is an important therapeutic chasm especially given the

649

650

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

large numbers of adolescent users whose brains are still developing. They may experience negative cognitive and motivational effects, which impact negatively on their school or college attendance and academic achievement in the longer term.
In general, the reinforcing effects of drugs of abuse in human beings are often thought to be
contingent on the rate of dopamine (DA) increases in the striatum (Volkow et al. 2007). This generalization may not hold for THC/cannabis. Two positron emission tomography (PET) studies
have shown no effect of acute THC on striatal DA release, when administered orally (Stokes et al.
2009) and intravenously (Barkus et al. 2011) whilst another did show significant DA release when
THC was smoked (Bossong et al. 2010). Neuroimaging studies have also sought to determine differences between those who are dependent on cannabis from those who use occasionally or not at
all. Reduced striatal DA synthesis capacity in heavy cannabis users relative to nonuser controls has
recently been found (Bloomfield et al. 2014) and reduced DA D2/D3 receptor availability has been
linked to cannabis use in users in some (Albrecht et al. 2013; Sevy et al. 2008) but not all (Stokes
et al. 2012) studies. No relationship has been found between reduced DA synthesis/receptor availability and psychosis-like symptoms from cannabis (Barkus et al. 2011; Bloomfield et al. 2014),
interestingly suggesting this biological marker is more important in addiction than psychosis in
individuals using cannabis recreationally.
The endocannabinoid (eCB) system, upon which cannabis acts, is also now thought to be
intrinsic to reward and reinforcement circuits by fine tuning DA neurons in the striatum (Melis
and Pistis 2012; Serrano and Parsons 2011), so it is likely that this is how the dependence forming
properties of cannabis are modulated, and the indirect action on DA may account for inconsistencies in the human studies. While enhancement of eCB signaling per se is not thought to produce
robust addiction-related behaviors, growing evidence implicates eCB signaling in the modulation
of the motivational effects produced by ethanol, nicotine, opiates (e.g., Gonzalez et al. 2002), and
to a lesser degree psychostimulant drugs (Pan et al. 2008). Further, preclinical studies suggest that
type 1 cannabinoid receptors (CB1) are implicated in the relapse to drug-seeking behaviors, both
from exposure to drug-conditioned cues and drug administration itself (Serrano and Parsons
2011). These finding suggest that modulating the eCB system may be a promising target in the
treatment of addiction (Morgan et al. 2013c).
Clinically, a major unmet challenge is the development of a safe, effective pharmacological
treatment for cannabis dependence which can be used conjointly with psychosocial therapies to
boost the current low efficacy of all treatment approaches. An effective pharmacological treatment would impact significantly not only on medical and legal costs associated with addiction,
but also—via neurocognitive and motivational enhancement—improve educational/vocational
achievement of young cannabis users. Critically it could also reduce their risks of associated mental health problems such as psychosis and of cognitive impairment.
36.2.2 Cannabis and psychosis

Converging evidence suggests that cannabis and THC can acutely produce a wide range of transient schizophrenia-like positive, negative, and cognitive symptoms (D’Souza et al. 2004; Mason
et al. 2009). Indeed, intravenous THC is one of the current pharmacological models of psychosis
alongside N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists like ketamine and serotonergic
hallucinogens like psilocybin.
Evidence for an association between long-term cannabis use and psychosis continues to accumulate with a number of longitudinal, population-based studies showing a roughly twofold
increase in psychotic symptoms or psychotic diagnoses in young adults who use cannabis heavily

Desired and Undesired Effects of Cannabis on the Human Mind and Psychological Well-Being

(di Forti et al. 2007; Henquet et al. 2005; Moore et al. 2007; see Morrison et al., Chapter 37, this
volume). The extent to which cannabis is causative in this association is hotly debated. The vast
majority of people who use cannabis do not develop schizophrenia, and many people diagnosed
with schizophrenia have never used cannabis. More agreement is found in evidence that heavy
cannabis use may result in young people who are vulnerable to psychosis for various genetic
and environmental risk factors, experiencing their first episode around 2 years earlier than they
might without using the drug. Earlier initiation of use will in turn impact negatively on both their
clinical and neurocognitive prognosis. People vary along a continuum of psychosis-proneness
(or schizotypy) which can be assessed with valid questionnaire measures. Henquet et al. (2005),
in a prospective study of 2400 young Germans, found that those who were more psychosisprone at baseline were no more likely than others to use cannabis 4 years later. However, those
psychosis-prone individuals who did use cannabis showed a 24% increased risk for psychotic
symptoms at follow-up compared to an increased risk of only 6% in those who were not psychosis-prone.
Clinically, much effort is being devoted to the early diagnosis of young people who, for various
genetic and environmental reasons, are at ultra-high risk (UHR) of developing schizophrenia
in the future. Prior to the first psychotic episode, during what is termed the “prodromal phase,”
UHR individuals experience mild cognitive and mood symptoms similar to those seen in the full
clinical disorder. Cannabis use in adolescence has been linked with greater prodromal symptoms
(Mietunnen et al. 2008). The symptom profile of this prodromal phase has been described in
various ways including Klosterkotter et al.’s (2001) framework. Using this framework we compared groups of sober individuals who were dependent on skunk (see section 36.4) with a group
dependent on the NMDA antagonist ketamine, a drug also acutely associated with psychotomimetic effects (Morgan et al. 2012a) and with control groups who did not use these drugs. We then
compared the daily skunk and ketamine users with the symptom profile of a group of UHR individuals who went on subsequently to develop schizophrenia. The profile of ketamine addicts was
virtually indistinguishable from the UHR group. Skunk users showed very similar cognitive disturbances to both these groups but did not show the same reduced emotional responsiveness, lack
of tolerance to stress, or perceptual disturbances (Morgan et al. 2012a). Given the current market
dominance of skunk, it is important, if difficult, to differentiate chronic, drug-related symptoms
from a clinical prodromal state. One obvious method for this is to reassess patients following
4 weeks’ abstinence from skunk although many cannabis-dependent patients will find this abstinence period very challenging.
Cannabinoid research has also enhanced our clinical understanding of the significance of the
human brain’s endogenous cannabinoid system. Higher levels of anandamide in cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) have been associated with lower psychotic symptoms both in individuals diagnosed
with schizophrenia (Giuffrida et al. 2004; Leweke et al. 1999) and in those classified as prodromal
(Koethe et al. 2009). Interestingly, schizophrenics with low (<5 times) use of cannabis had 10-fold
higher levels of CSF anandamide than higher users (>20 times) or healthy low or high users
(Leweke et al. 2007). To investigate whether cannabis use was associated with alterations in eCB
levels in recreational users of cannabis, Morgan et al. (2013c) measured CSF anandamide levels
in heavy cannabis users (use 22.6 ± 7.2 days/month), light cannabis users (4.3 ± 3.4 days/month),
and controls (nonusers). Anandamide levels were significantly lower in heavy than light users.
Intriguingly, levels of anandamide correlated negatively with psychotic-like symptoms, paralleling results with prodromal and schizophrenic individuals. Although obtaining CSF samples from
humans is not easy, these are the only current markers of central eCBs and more research in this

651

652

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

area will help elucidate how these brain chemicals may mediate individual differences in the mental health effects of exogenous cannabinoids.
36.2.3 Cannabis and neurocognitive function

ECBs are crucial in certain forms of neuronal plasticity and THC has been shown to disrupt longterm potentiation (a model for learning and memory) and long-term depression in preclinical
studies (Zhu 2006). In humans, this is reflected in the ability of acute cannabis and acute THC to
robustly impair cognitive function, especially working and episodic memory (Curran et al. 2002;
Gonzalez 2007). Working memory deficits are seen less in the ability to simply hold information
online for brief periods (e.g., remembering a telephone number before dialing it) and more in the
ability to manipulate that information whilst holding it online (e.g., doing mental arithmetic).
Episodic memory refers to one’s personal, contextualized autobiography—for example, your recollection of what movie you last saw, who with, where, and whether you ate popcorn or went for a
meal afterwards. Both working and episodic memory deficits induced by THC or cannabis show
a clear dose dependency and increase with task difficulty (for reviews see Gonzalez 2007; Solowij
and Battisti 2008). These robust effects of THC and cannabis are commensurate with the high
density of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in the hippocampus and frontal cortex (Ranganathan and
D’Souza 2006), areas critical in memory. Several brain imaging studies have shown that recreational cannabis users show altered regional cerebral blood flow during memory tasks (e.g., Block
et al. 2002) and signs of reduced neuronal activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex alongside
deficits in working memory and attention (e.g., Hermann et al. 2007). Recently Solowij et al.
(2013) showed that hippocampal changes were associated with long-term cannabis use and that
these were most marked in psychotic individuals who also used cannabis.
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses suggest that residual impairments a day or so after
cannabis use are restricted to performance on fairly artificial tasks like remembering word-lists
and are very small in terms of effect size (Gonzalez 2007). A controlled study of THC (7.5, 15
mg) found no residual cognitive impairment 24 h after ingestion (Curran et al. 2002). Similarly,
long-term effects after abstinence are inconsistent, with some studies showing no impairment a
few weeks after abstinence (Pope et al. 2001) and others showing very subtle deficits persisting
longer term in heavier users (Gonzalez 2007; Solowij and Battisti 2008). Based on the Dunedin
longitudinal cohort, Meier et al. (2012) concluded that heavy cannabis use was associated with a
decline of around eight intelligence quotient (IQ) points from childhood to early adulthood. This
interpretation was challenged by a re-analysis of the same data (Rogeberg 2013) which suggested
that the apparent link between IQ and heavy cannabis use was an artefact due to important differences such as socioeconomic status between the relatively small group of 38 heavy cannabis users
and 1000 other individuals. It also seems incongruous that the heavy users in Meier et al.’s (2012)
study showed impairments across the board on every neurocognitive test employed rather than
the differential effects on memory expected from previous studies. One reason why findings on
residual and long-term effects of this drug are inconsistent may be that, like psychotic and addictive effects, there is marked individual variation in the cognitive effects of cannabis which may
also depend on the type of cannabis used.
36.2.4 Cannabis, anxiety, and depression

There is also evidence that chronic cannabis use is associated with changes in other indices of
mental health and well-being. Preclinical studies have implicated the eCB system in the regulation of emotion (Moriera and Wotjak 2010). Thus it follows that long-term disruption of this

Desired and Undesired Effects of Cannabis on the Human Mind and Psychological Well-Being

system by the self-administration of exogenous cannabinoids could disrupt mood regulation.
Meta-analyses have suggested a link between heavy cannabis use and depression (e.g., Moore
et al. 2007). In our own studies of young, daily cannabis users, we have found that higher THC levels in hair are significantly associated with higher levels of both depression and anxiety (Morgan
et al. 2012b). However, a recent epidemiological study (Degenhart et al. 2013) suggested increases
in depression are not long-lasting, as they found no consistent associations between adolescent
cannabis use and depression at age 29 years. The same study showed daily cannabis use and cannabis dependence in early adulthood was associated with more than double the rate of anxiety
disorders at 29 years of age. The authors conclude that the association reported between cannabis
use and anxiety may arise because the same factors that predispose people to use cannabis also
increase their risks for common mental disorders. These common factors might include a combination of biological, personality, social, and environmental factors. This is plausible given social
disadvantage is more common both among problematic drug users and among those who meet
criteria for common mental disorders.

36.3 What determines individual variation in experiencing

the desired and undesired effects of cannabis?
In some European countries like the UK, around 50% of 16–24-year-olds have used cannabis.
Cannabis use, in a sense, is approaching “normative” behavior for this age group. Although most
cannabis users will experience at least transient memory impairments, only around 10% of regular
users will become dependent on the drug and only a tiny minority will ever develop psychosis. So
what determines an individual’s vulnerability to experiencing the undesired effects of cannabis?
Greater frequency, duration, and amount of cannabis use is one factor influencing vulnerability to both dependence and psychosis (di Forti et al. 2009; Moore et al. 2007). Increased use
also means an individual is less likely to experience the desired effects of cannabis, as tolerance
develops (D’Souza et al. 2009). Age of first cannabis use and years of use are often confounded in
studies but the former appears to show an overall influence on vulnerability (McGrath et al. 2010;
Solowij et al. 2011) which might be mediated in part by effects on white matter in the developing brain (Zalesky et al. 2012). Psychosis-proneness influences the psychotic-like effects of acute
THC/cannabis (Barkus et al. 2006, Henquet et al. 2005; Mason et al. 2009; Verdoux et al. 2003).
Finally various genetic factors have been a focus of several studies: e.g., the catechol-O-methyl
transferase (COMT) gene (Caspi et al. 2005; Zammit et al. 2007, 2011) and the RAC-alpha serine/
threonine-protein kinase gene, AKT1 (di Forti et al. 2012). Although Caspi et al. (2005) suggested
that cannabis use was associated with psychosis more in those with the Val/Val than Val/Met or
Met/Met alleles of the COMT gene, subsequent larger-scale studies by Zammit and colleagues
(Williams et al. 2005; Zammit et al. 2011) have not replicated this. Variations in several other
genes either have been associated with cannabis abuse/dependence or are components of the
eCB system tentatively associated with susceptibility to schizophrenia. These include the GABAA
receptor gene, GABRA2 (Agrawal et al. 2006), and fatty acid amide hydrolase (Tyndale et al. 2007)
and cannabinoid CB1 receptor genes (CNR1) (e.g., Schact et al. 2012; Ujike et al. 2002). One finding which may at first seem paradoxical is that, within those diagnosed with schizophrenia, those
with a history of cannabis use are found to have superior neurocognitive functioning than those
without (e.g., Yücel et al. 2012). Perhaps the most parsimonious interpretation of this at present is
that the group mean effect is driven by a subgroup of cognitively less impaired and higher socially
functioning individuals who only developed psychosis after a relatively early initiation into cannabis use.

653

654

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

One factor which recent research strongly suggests may mediate the association between cannabis and addiction, psychosis, and cognitive impairment is the type and level of cannabinoids in
the cannabis an individual smokes.

36.4 How does variation in strains of cannabis influence

desired and undesired effects?
Weed. Charis. Pot. Dagga. Ganja. Afghan Black. Purple Haze. Northern Lights. Thai Stick. Sensi.
Reefer. Bhang. Skunk. Sinsemilla. Herbal. Hash. Green. These are just a few of the many names
given to cannabis. Connoisseurs will discuss the pros and cons of different varieties much as
a master of wine will debate grapes. Whilst these names are presumed to be partly culturally
mediated, some reflect the strengths and compositions of different varieties of cannabis. What
biochemically differentiates these different types is likely to be the combinations and quantities of
up to around 100 cannabinoids in any strain (Pertwee 2008), perhaps the most relevant of which,
as discussed earlier, are THC and CBD.
The relative THC/CBD ratio in cannabis varies greatly. Levels of CBD can range from virtually none to up to 40% (Hardwick and King 2008). Higher levels of THC and negligible levels of
CBD have been found in varieties grown hydroponically under intense farming conditions. These
strains known as “skunk” or sinsemilla are increasingly dominating the market in the UK, the
Netherlands, and other European countries (e.g., Hardwick and King 2008).
Although high THC cannabis has become increasingly available over recent years, little is
known about changes in levels of other cannabinoids as these are seldom measured. One study
in the US, however, analyzed over 30,000 confiscated samples and found that between 1994 and
2004, the THC content of cannabis trebled in resin and doubled in leaf, whilst the average level of
other cannabinoids, including CBD, remained unchanged (Mehmedic et al. 2005). This implies
that the THC/CBD ratio has risen over recent years. However, our current knowledge of THC and
CBD levels stems only from drug seizures and little is known about the ratio in “street” cannabis.
Importantly, we do not know how increased THC in strains like skunk affects the individual’s
intake. Just as people will vary their drinking behavior according to whether a glass of colorless
liquid contains water, white wine, or vodka, cannabis users may adjust their intake according to
the THC content as judged by the subjective effects experienced.
In an opportunistic study, we used hair analysis to explore the impact of smoking different
levels of cannabinoids on psychotic-like symptoms in a population of drug users (Morgan and
Curran 2008). We hypothesized that habitual use of cannabis richer in CBD may protect people
from the psychotic-like effects of THC. We found that individuals whose hair indicated that
they had been habitually smoking cannabis that contained CBD (as well as THC) showed fewer
psychotic-like symptoms than those whose hair showed no evidence of CBD. There are two main
interpretations of this finding. First, individuals who are higher in psychosis proneness prefer and
selectively choose to smoke cannabis which is higher in THC and lacking CBD. There is some tentative evidence for this interpretation (di Forti et al. 2009). Second, CBD may reduce the capacity
of THC to induce psychotic-like symptoms in recreational cannabis users.
A subsequent study designed to contrast these two interpretations ruled out the former interpretation (Morgan et al. 2012b). We found differences only between daily and less than daily recreational users in preference for cannabis, with daily users preferring to smoke strains with a high
THC content. This probably reflects the development of tolerance to cannabis and subsequent need
to use more potent forms to maintain the same psychological effect. In fact, when asked about their
preference for different strains, there were no differences between the CBD present and CBD absent

Desired and Undesired Effects of Cannabis on the Human Mind and Psychological Well-Being

groups. Further, recreational users generally showed a greater preference for strains other than the
high-THC, low-CBD form of cannabis known as “skunk” or sinsemilla. We found that individuals
with greater psychotic like symptoms expressed a greater preference for non-skunk strains (Morgan
et al. 2012b). Of the 412 samples analyzed, 75% were skunk whereas only 34% of the 412 cannabis
users assessed preferred skunk to higher CBD varieties. The dominance of skunk in our community sample is similar to that estimated from cannabis seizures in the UK which was 80% in 2008
(Hardwick and King 2009), a marked rise from 55% in 2004/2005 (Potter et al. 2008) and 30% in
2002 (King et al. 2005). Worryingly this data suggests that the market in some countries like the
UK as well as the Netherlands (Pijlman et al. 2005) is increasingly dominated by skunk.
Recently we investigated the acute impact of different levels of cannabinoids by taking samples
of cannabis actually smoked by users and relating these to the acute effects of the drug taken in a
naturalistic environment. These studies showed that acutely smoking cannabis with higher levels
of CBD protects users against the memory impairing effects of THC (Morgan et al. 2010b). Thus
the presence of CBD in cannabis, at a level that did not affect cannabis-induced psychotic-like
symptoms, prevented memory impairment and also reduced anxiety levels. Further we found
that the presence of CBD in an individual’s cannabis reduced “attentional bias” toward not only
cannabis-related cues but also food stimuli (Morgan et al. 2010a). So although the presence of
CBD had no effect on how stoned or “high” participants felt, it did prevent the ability of acute
THC to grab the individual’s attention toward drug- and food-related pictures. These findings
concur with recent preclinical findings that suggest CBD may reduce the salience of drug cues
(Ren et al. 2009) and findings in healthy human volunteers that suggest that CBD and THC may
have opposing effects on some of the neural substrates of human memory (Bhattacharyya et al.
2010). As memory function can impact on educational and vocational achievement, it is important to determine whether these acute, protective effects of CBD on memory might also be seen
longer term.

36.5 Conclusions
Cannabis has been used for thousands of years for its desired effects, which include a range of
clinical and medicinal properties as well as the psychological and social effects valued by recreational users. This use can carry a penalty: a range of undesired effects that vary in the severity of
their impact on the life of the individual. Although evidence of clear causality is lacking, these
undesired effects span mild cognitive impairment, to perhaps the most disabling of all psychiatric
disorders, schizophrenia. However both medical and recreational users of cannabis often seem to
rate the benefits as outweighing the risks in choosing to continue their cannabis use. Both desired
and undesired effects of cannabis will depend on a range of factors including an individual’s
level of cannabis use, personality (psychosis-proneness), mental health status, the particular
cannabinoids ingested (especially THC and CBD), the relative dosages of these cannabinoids,
the frequency of cannabis ingestion, and the periods over the individual’s life span in which this
ingestion occurs.
Young people, especially those more likely to be vulnerable to psychosis or addiction for genetic
and/or environmental reasons, should be clearly warned of the greater harms of smoking highTHC, low-CBD strains of cannabis such as “skunk.” The therapeutic potential of the many cannabinoids present in cannabis plants is tantalizing. Taken in the context of research on the acute
and chronic effects of THC and CBD in cannabis that users smoke naturalistically, there is great
promise for one or more of those cannabinoids to be potential treatments, even for some of the
undesired mental health effects of cannabis itself.

655

656

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants to HVC and CJAM from the UK Medical Research Council
and European College of Neuropsychopharmacology. The authors have no conflict of interest.
The authors thank Sharinjeet Dhiman for her kind help in the preparation of this chapter. They
also would like to thank all the cannabis users who took part in their studies and the UK Home
Office and the ex-Forensic Science Service for their support of the aims of their research.

References
Agrawal, A., Grant, J.D., and Waldron, M. (2006). Risk for initiation of substance use as a function
of age of onset of cigarette, alcohol and cannabis use: findings in a Midwestern female twin cohort.
Preventative Medicine, 43, 125–128.
Albrecht, D.S., Skosnik, P.D., Vollmer, J.M., et al. (2013). Striatal D2/D3 receptor availability is inversely
correlated with cannabis consumption in chronic marijuana users. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 128,
52–57.
Barkus, E., Morrison, P.D., Vuletic, D., et al. (2011). Does intravenous Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol increase
dopamine release? A SPET study. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 25, 1462–1468.
Barkus, E.J., Stirling, J., Hopkins, R.S., and Lewis, S. (2006). Cannabis-induced psychosis-like experiences
are associated with high schizotypy. Psychopathology, 39, 175–178.
Bergamaschi, M.M., Queiroz, R.H., Chagas, M.H., et al. (2011). Cannabidiol reduces the anxiety induced
by simulated public speaking in treatment-naive social phobia patients. Neuropsychopharmacology, 36,
1219–1226.
Bhattacharyya, S., Morrison, P.D., Fusar-Poli, P., et al. (2010). Opposite effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
and cannabidiol on human brain function and psychopathology. Neuropsychopharmacology, 35, 764–774.
Block, R.I., O’Leary, D.S., Hichwa, R.D., et al. (2002). Effects of frequent marijuana use on memory related
regional cerebral blood flow. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior, 72, 237–250.
Bloomfield, M.A.P, Morgan, C.J.A., Egerton, A., Kapur, S., Curran, H.V., and Howes, O.D. (2014).
Dopaminergic function in cannabis users and its relationship to cannabis-induced psychotic symptoms.
Biological Psychiatry, 75, 470–478.
Bossong, M.G., van Berckel, B.N., Boellaard, R., et al. (2009). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol induces dopamine release in the human striatum. Neuropsychopharmacology, 34, 759–766.
Bourassa, M. and Vaugeois, P. (2001). Effects of marijuana use on divergent thinking. Creativity Research
Journal, 13, 411–416.
Budney, A.J. and Hughes, J.R. (2006). The cannabis withdrawal syndrome. Current Opinion in Psychiatry,
19, 233–238.
Campos, A.C., Moreira, F.A., Gomes, F.V., Del Bel, E.A., and Guimarães, F.S. (2012). Multiple mechanisms involved in the large-spectrum therapeutic potential of cannabidiol in psychiatric disorders.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. Series B, Biological Sciences, 367, 3364–3378.
Carter, G.T. and Ugalde, V. (2004). Medical marijuana: emerging applications for the management of neurologic disorders. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics of North America, 15, 943–954.
Caspi, A., Moffitt, T.E., and Cannon, M. (2005). Moderation of the effect of adolescent-onset cannabis use
on adult psychosis by a functional polymorphism in the catechol-O methyltransferase gene: longitudinal evidence of a gene X environment interaction. Biological Psychiatry, 15, 1117–1127.
Curran, H.V., Brignell, C., Fletcher, S., Middleton, P., and Henry, J. (2002). Cognitive and subjective
dose-response effects of acute oral Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in infrequent cannabis users.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 164, 61–70.
Das, R.K., Ramadas, M., Yogan, K., et al. (2013). Cannabidiol enhances consolidation of fear extinction in
humans. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 226, 781–792.

Desired and Undesired Effects of Cannabis on the Human Mind and Psychological Well-Being

Degenhardt, L., Coffey, C., Romaniuk, H., et al. (2013). The persistence of the association between adolescent cannabis use and common mental disorders into young adulthood. Addiction, 108, 124–133.
Di Forti, M., Iyegbe, C., Sallis H., et al. (2012). Confirmation that the AKT1 (rs2494732) genotype influences the risk of psychosis in cannabis users. Biological Psychiatry, 72, 811–816.
Di Forti, M., Morgan, C., Dazzan, P., et al. (2009). High-potency cannabis and the risk of psychosis. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 195, 488–491.
Di Forti, M., Morrison, P.D., Butt, A., and Murray, R.M. (2007). Cannabis use and psychiatric and cognitive disorders: the chicken or the egg? Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 20, 228–234.
D’Souza, D.C., Perry, E., MacDougall, L., et al. (2004). The psychotomimetic effects of intravenous delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in healthy individuals: implications for psychosis. Neuropsychopharmacology,
29, 1558–1572.
D’Souza, D.C., Pittman, B., Perry, E., and Simen, A. (2009). Preliminary evidence of cannabinoid effects
on brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels in humans. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 202,
569–578.
D’Souza, D.C., Ranganathan, M., Braley G., et al. (2008). Blunted psychotomimetic and amnestic
effects of Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in frequent users of cannabis. Neuropsychopharmacology, 33,
2505–2516.
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction. (2011). Annual Report on the State of the
Drugs Problem in Europe. Lisbon: EMCDDA.
Fergusson, D.M. and Horwood, L.J. (2000). Does cannabis use encourage other forms of illicit drug use?
Addiction, 95, 505–520.
Freeman, T.P., Morgan, C.J.A.M., and Curran, H.V. (2012). Drug-cue induced overshadowing: selective
disruption of natural reward processing by cigarette cues amongst abstinent but not satiated smokers.
Psychological Medicine 42, 161–171.
Gingold, A. (1982). Our Own Marijuana. New York: Avon Books.
Giuffrida, A., Leweke, M., Gerth, C.W., et al. (2004). Cerebrospinal anandamide levels are elevated in
acute schizophrenia and are inversely correlated with psychotic symptoms. Neuropsychopharmacology,
29, 2108–2114.
Gonzalez, R. (2007). Acute and non-acute effects of cannabis on brain functioning and neuropsychological
performance. Neuropsychology Review, 17, 347–361.
González, R., Carey, C., and Grant, I. (2002). Nonacute (residual) neuropsychological effects of cannabis use: a qualitative analysis and systematic review. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 42(11 Suppl.),
48S–57S.
González, S., Cascio, M.G., Fernández-Ruiz, J., Fezza, F., Di Marzo, V., and Ramos, J.A. (2002). Changes
in endocannabinoid contents in the brain of rats chronically exposed to nicotine, ethanol or cocaine.
Brain Research, 954, 73–81.
Green, B., Kavanagh, D., and Young, R. (2003). Being stoned: a review of self-reported cannabis effects.
Drug and Alcohol Review, 22, 453–460.
Grinspoon, L. and Bakalar, J. (1993). Marihuana, the Forbidden Medicine. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Guimares, F.S., Chiaretti, T.M., and Graeff, F.G. (1990). Antianxiety effects of cannabidiol in the elevated
plus-maze. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 100, 558–559.
Gurley, R.J., Aranow, R., and Katz, M. (1998). Medicinal marijuana: a comprehensive review. Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs, 30, 137–147.
Hall, W. and Degenhardt, L. (2007). Prevalence and correlates of cannabis use in developed and developing
countries. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 20, 393–397.
Hardwick, S. and King, L.A. (2008). Home Office Cannabis Potency Study. St Albans: Home Office
Scientific Development Branch.

657

658

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Henquet, C., Murray, R., Linszen, D., and van Os, J. (2005). The environment and schizophrenia: the role
of cannabis use. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 31, 608–612.
Hermann, D., Sartorius, A., Welzel, H., et al. (2007). Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex N-acetylaspartate/total
creatine (NAA/tCr) loss in male recreational cannabis users. Biological Psychiatry, 61, 1281–1289.
King, L.A., Carpentier, C., and Griffiths, P. (2005). Cannabis potency in Europe. Addiction, 100, 884–886.
Klosterkotter, J. Hellmich, M., Steinmeyer, E.M., and Schultze-Lutter, F. (2001). Diagnosing schizophrenia in the initial prodromal phase. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58, 158–164.
Koethe, D., Giuffrida, A., Schreiber, D., et al. (2009). Anandamide elevation in cerebrospinal fluid in initial prodromal states of psychosis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 194, 371–372.
Levin, F.R., Mariani, J., Brooks, D.J., et al. (2013). A randomized double-blind, placebo controlled trial
of venlafaxine-extended release for co-occurring cannabis dependence and depressive disorders.
Addiction, 108, 1084–1094.
Leweke, F.M., Giuffrida, A., Wurster, U., et al. (1999). Elevated endogenous cannabinoids in schizophrenia. NeuroReport, 10, 1665–1669.
Leweke, F.M., Giuffrida, A., Koethe D., et al. (2007). Anandamide levels in cerebrospinal fluid of firstepisode schizophrenic patients: impact of cannabis use. Schizophrenia Research, 94, 29–36.
Leweke, F.M., Piomelli, D., Pahlisch, F., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol enhances anandamide signaling and
alleviates psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. Translational Psychiatry, 2, e94.
Linszen, D. and van Amelsvoort, T. (2007). Cannabis and psychosis: an update on course and biological
plausible mechanisms. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 20, 116–120.
Lu, L., Fielding, A., Janicheck, J., Francese, C., Curran, H.V., and Morgan, C.J.A. (in preparation).
Patients’ perception of the effectiveness of medical marijuana: impact of different cannabinoids.
Mason, B.J., Crean, R., Goodell, V., et al. (2012). A proof-of-concept randomized controlled study of
gabapentin: effects on cannabis use, withdrawal and executive function deficits in cannabis-dependent
adults. Neuropsychopharmacology, 37, 1689–1698.
Mason, O., Morgan, C.J., Dhiman, S.K., et al. (2009). Acute cannabis use causes increased psychotomimetic experiences in individuals prone to psychosis. Psychological Medicine, 39, 951–956.
McGrath, J., Welham, J., Scott, J., et al. (2010). Association between cannabis use and psychosis-related
outcomes using sibling pair analysis in a cohort of young adults. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67,
440–447.
Mehmedic, Z., Martin, J., Foster, S. and ElSohly, M.A. (2005). Δ9-THC and other cannabinoids content
of confiscated marijuana: potency trends, 1994–2004. In: International Association for Cannabis as
Medicine (IACM) 3rd conference on Cannabinoids in Medicine. Leiden: IACM.
Meier, M.H., Caspi, A., and Ambler, A. (2012). Persistent cannabis users show neuropsychological decline
from childhood to midlife. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 109, E2657–E2664.
Melis, M. and Pistis, M. (2012). Hub and switches: endocannabinoid signalling in midbrain dopamine neurons. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. Series B, Biological Sciences, 367,
3276–3285.
Miettunen, J., Törmänen, S., Murray G.K., et al. (2008). Association of cannabis use with prodromal
symptoms of psychosis in adolescence. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 470–471.
Moore, T.H., Zammit, S., Lingford-Hughes, A., et al. (2007). Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or affective mental health outcomes: a systematic review. Lancet, 370, 319–328.
Moreira, F.A. and Wotjak, C.T. (2010). Cannabinoids and anxiety. Current Topics in Behavioral
Neurosciences, 2, 429–450.
Morgan, C.J., Duffin, S., Hunt, S., Monaghan, L., Mason, O., and Curran, H.V. (2012a). Neurocognitive
function and schizophrenia-proneness in individuals dependent on ketamine, on high potency cannabis
(‘skunk’) or on cocaine. Pharmacopsychiatry, 45, 269–74.

Desired and Undesired Effects of Cannabis on the Human Mind and Psychological Well-Being

Morgan, C.J., Freeman, T.P., Schafer, G.L., and Curran, H.V. (2010a). Cannabidiol attenuates the
appetitive effects of Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol in humans smoking their chosen cannabis.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 35, 1879–1885.
Morgan, C.J., Noronha, L.A., Muetzelfeldt, M., Fielding, A., and Curran, H.V. (2013b). Harms and benefits associated with psychoactive drugs: findings of an international survey of active drug users. Journal
of Psychopharmacology, 27, 497–506.
Morgan, C.J., Rothwell, E., Atkinson, H., Mason, O., and Curran, H.V. (2010c). Hyper-priming in cannabis users: a naturalistic study of the effects of cannabis on semantic memory function. Psychiatry
Research, 176, 213–218.
Morgan, C.J., Schafer, G., Freeman, T.P., and Curran, H.V. (2010b). Impact of cannabidiol on the
acute memory and psychotomimetic effects of smoked cannabis: naturalistic study. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 197, 285–290.
Morgan, C.J.A. and Curran, H.V. (2008). Effects of cannabidiol on schizophrenia-like symptoms in cannabis users. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 306–307.
Morgan, C.J.A., Das, R.K., Joye, A., Curran, H.V. and Kamboj, S.K. (2013a). Cannabidiol reduces cigarette consumption in tobacco smokers: preliminary findings. AddictiveBehaviors, 38, 2433–2436
Morgan, C.J.A., Gardener, C., Schafer, G., et al. (2012b). Sub-chronic impact of cannabinoids in street
cannabis on cognition, psychotic-like symptoms and psychological well-being. Psychological Medicine,
42, 391–400.
Morgan, C.J.A., Page, E., Schaefer, C., et al. (2013). Cerebrospinal fluid anandamide levels, cannabis use
and psychotic-like symptoms. British Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 381–382.
Pan, B., Hillard, C.J., and Liu, Q.S. (2008). Endocannabinoid signaling mediates cocaine-induced inhibitory synaptic plasticity in midbrain dopamine neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 1385–1397.
Pertwee, R.G. (2008). The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology of three plant cannabinoids: delta9tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin. British Journal of Pharmacology,
153, 199–215.
Pijlman, F.T., Rigter, S.M., Hoek, J., Goldschmidt, H.M., and Niesink, R.J. (2005). Strong increase in total
delta-THC in cannabis preparations sold in Dutch coffee shops. Addiction Biology, 10, 171–180.
Pope, H.G. Jr., Gruber, A.J., Hudson, J.I., Huestis, M.A., and Yurgelun-Todd, D. (2005).
Neuropsychological performance in long-term cannabis users. Archive of General Psychiatry, 58, 909–915.
Potter, D.J., Clark, P., and Brown, M.B. (2008). Potency of delta 9-THC and other cannabinoids in cannabis in England in 2005: implications for psychoactivity and pharmacology. Journal of Forensic Sciences,
53, 90–94.
Ranganathan, M. and D’Souza, D.C. (2006). The acute effects of cannabinoids on memory in humans: a
review. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 188, 425–444.
Ren, Y., Whittard, J., Higuera-Matas, A., Morris, C.V., and Hurd, Y.L. (2009). Cannabidiol, a nonpsychotropic component of cannabis, inhibits cue-induced heroin seeking and normalizes discrete mesolimbic
neuronal disturbances. The Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 14764–14769.
Rogeberg, O. (2013). Correlations between cannabis use and IQ change in the Dunedin cohort are consistent with confounding from socioeconomic status. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 110, 4251–4254.
Schacht, J.P., Hutchison, K.E., and Filbey, F.M. (2012). Associations between cannabinoid receptor-1 (CNR1)
variation and hippocampus and amygdala volumes in heavy cannabis users. Neuropsychopharmacology, 37,
2368–2376.
Schafer, G., Feilding, A., Morgan, C.J., Agathangelou, M., Freeman, T.P., and Curran H.V. (2012).
Investigating the interaction between schizotypy, divergent thinking and cannabis use. Consciousness
and Cognition, 21, 292–298.

659

660

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Schier, A.R., Ribeiro, N.P., Silva, A.C., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol, a Cannabis sativa constituent, as an
anxiolytic drug. Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria, 34(Suppl.1), 104–111.
Serrano, A. and Parsons, L.H. (2011). Endocannabinoid influence in drug reinforcement, dependence and
addiction-related behaviors. Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 132, 215–241.
Sevy, S., Smith, G.S, Ma, Y., et al. (2008). Cerebral glucose metabolism and D2/D3 receptor availability in young adults with cannabis dependence measured with positron emission tomography.
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 197, 549–556.
Solowij, N. and Battisti, R. (2008). The chronic effects of cannabis on memory in humans: a review.
Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 1, 81–98.
Solowij, N., Jones, K.A., Rozman, M.E., et al. (2011). Verbal learning and memory in adolescent cannabis
users, alcohol users and non-users. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 216, 131–144.
Solowij, N., Walterfang, M., Lubman, D.I., et al. (2013). Alteration to hippocampal shape in cannabis
users with and without schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 143, 179–184.
Stern, C.A., Gazarini, L., Takahashi, R.N., Guimarães, F.S., and Bertoglio, L.J. (2012). On disruption of fear memory by reconsolidation blockade: evidence from cannabidiol treatment.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 37, 2132–2142.
Stokes, P.R., Egerton, A., Watson, B., et al. (2012). History of cannabis use is not associated with alterations in striatal dopamine D2/D3 receptor availability. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 26, 144–149.
Stokes, P.R., Mehta, M.A., Curran, H.V., Breen, G., and Grasby, P.M. (2009). Can recreational doses of
THC produce significant dopamine release in the human striatum? Neuroimage, 48, 186–190.
Taylor, B. (1854). The Lands of the Saracen. New York: Putnam.
Tyler, A. (1986) Street Drugs. London: New English Library
Tyndale, R.F., Payne, J.I., Gerber, A.L., and Sipe, J.C. (2007). The fatty acid amide hydrolase C385A
(P129T) missense variant in cannabis users: studies of drug use and dependence in Caucasians.
American Journal of Medical Genetics, 44B, 660–666.
Ujike, H., Takaki, M., Nakata, K., et al. (2002). CNR1, central cannabinoid receptor gene, associated with
susceptibility to hebephrenic schizophrenia. Molecular Psychiatry, 7, 515–518.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. (2009). World Drug Report 2009. New York: United Nations.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. (2010). World Drug Report 2010. New York: United Nations.
Verdoux, H., Gindre, C., Sorbara, F., Tournier, M., and Swendsen, J.D. (2003).Effects of cannabis and
psychosis vulnerability in daily life: an experience sampling test study. Psychological Medicine, 33, 23–32.
Volkow, N.D., Fowler, J.S., Wang, G.J., Swanson, J.M., and Telang, F. (2007). Dopamine in drug abuse and
addiction: results of imaging studies and treatment implications. Archives of Neurology, 64, 1575–1579.
Williams, H.J., Glaser, B., Williams, N.M., Norton, N., and Zammit, S. (2005). No association between
schizophrenia and polymorphisms in COMT in two large samples. The American Journal of Psychiatry,
162, 1736–1738.
Wittchen, H.U., Jacobi, F., Rehm, J., et al. (2011). The size and burden of mental disorders and other disorders of the brain in Europe 2010. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 21, 655–679.
Yücel, M., Bora, E., Lubman, D.I., et al. (2012). The impact of cannabis use on cognitive functioning in
patients with schizophrenia: a meta-analysis of existing findings and new data in a first-episode sample.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 38, 316–330.
Zalesky, A., Solowij, N., Yücel, M., et al. (2012). Effect of long-term cannabis use on axonal fibre connectivity. Brain, 135, 2245–2255.
Zammit, S., Owen, M.J., Evans, J., Heron, J., and Lewis, G. (2011). Cannabis, COMT and psychotic experiences. British Journal of Psychiatry, 199, 380–385.
Zammit, S., Spurlock, G., Williams, H., et al. (2007). Genotype effects of CHRNA7, CNR1 and COMT in
schizophrenia: interactions with tobacco and cannabis use. British Journal of Psychiatry, 191, 402–407.
Zhu, H.J., Wang, J.S., Markowitz, J.S., et al. (2006). Characterization of P-glycoprotein inhibition by major
cannabinoids from marijuana. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 317, 850–857.

Chapter 37

Recreational Cannabis: The Risk
of Schizophrenia
Paul D. Morrison, Sagnik Bhattacharyya,
and Robin M. Murray

37.1 Introduction
Cannabis is the most widely used illicit drug in the world. Various preparations are available
including traditional hash resin and marijuana as well as more potent products such as sinsemilla (often termed “skunk”). The increasing availability of the latter product caused alarm in the
media although this has now been largely superseded by concern over the so-called “legal highs,”
a range of substances, which can be purchased online, that includes stimulants as well as synthetic
cannabinoids (sometimes termed “spice”) containing HU-210, JWH-018, etc. (Gunderson et al.
2012). The main worry regarding the recreational use of cannabinoids (herbal or synthetic) is the
risk to users’ mental health, specifically the risk of psychotic illness (Hall 2006).

37.2 Cannabis use, transient psychosis, and the onset

of schizophrenia
It has long been known that, in some users, cannabis/tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) intoxication
can elicit an acute paranoid psychosis (Murray et al. 2007). This is beyond doubt, appearing in
the ancient Chinese and Indian medical texts, the writings of Baudelaire and Moreau from the
nineteenth century, and latterly, in formal laboratory- or community-based experimental studies
(D’Souza et al. 2004, 2005; Henquet et al. 2006; Morrison et al. 2009; Verdoux et al. 2003). There
is also no doubt that cannabis use can worsen the course of a pre-existing chronic psychotic disorder, with a recurrence or worsening of positive symptoms (hallucinations and delusions) and further hospitalization (Bahorik et al. 2013; Degenhardt et al. 2007; Foti et al. 2010; Grech et al. 2005;
Hides et al. 2006; Wobrock et al. 2013). And it is now clear from numerous studies that patients
with schizophrenia who have a history of cannabis use have their first psychotic breakdown at an
earlier age, compared to those who did not use the drug (Barnes et al. 2006; Barrigon et al. 2010;
Buhler et al. 2002; Dekker et al. 2012; Gonzalez-Pinto et al. 2008; Myles et al. 2012; Sugranyes
et al. 2009; Tosato et al. 2013; Veen et al. 2004), by 2.7 years on average (Large et al. 2011). This
is not merely a statistical point because the earlier a psychosis emerges the worse is the outcome
(Lauronen et al. 2007). Where there has been some controversy is around the issue of whether
cannabis can actually cause schizophrenia in the first place (Gage et al. 2013).
37.2.1 Cannabis use and schizophrenia

Epidemiological surveys conducted in numerous countries, since the late 1980s, have been consistent in showing an association between cannabis use and psychotic symptoms/schizophrenia

662

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

(Andreasson et al. 1987; Arseneault et al. 2002; Callaghan et al. 2012; Ferdinand et al. 2005;
Fergusson et al. 2005; Henquet et al. 2005b; Rossler et al. 2012; Tien and Anthony 1990; van Os
et al. 2002; Weiser et al. 2002; Zammit et al. 2002). But an association is not the same as causation.
Alternative explanations, at least in theory, are reverse causality (i.e., that people with an existing psychosis are more likely to use cannabis, perhaps as self-medication) and confounding (e.g.
cannabis is merely a marker for a “true” causative agent, perhaps the use of another drug such as
amphetamine) (Zammit et al. 2012).
Regarding the issue of reverse causality, in longitudinal follow-up studies, where the temporal
relationship between cannabis use and schizophrenia can be assessed with some confidence, the
most consistent finding is that cannabis use predates the onset of psychosis (Castle 2013; Zammit
et al. 2012). Regarding confounding, all of the longitudinal studies to date have made allowances,
by incorporating factors such as amphetamine use into the statistical model (Castle 2013; Zammit
et al. 2012). The general finding is that the incorporation of these putative confounders reduces
the strength of the association between cannabis and schizophrenia, but that the association
remains (and remains statistically significant) (Zammit et al. 2012). In theory, it is possible that
residual confounding persists, and that an unknown factor “drives” the relationship—but there
are no suggestions as to what this unknown factor could be (Gage et al. 2013).
37.2.2 Cannabis and schizophrenia: the strength of the relationship

The strength of the association between cannabis and schizophrenia is best framed in terms of
an odds ratio. Overall, taking an average of the recent studies, it has been found that cannabis
use approximately doubles the odds of developing schizophrenia (Arseneault et al. 2004; Casadio
et al, 2011; Henquet et al. 2005a; Moore et al. 2007). Importantly, however, there appears to be
a dose–response relationship, in that the more extensive the use of cannabis, the higher the risk.
The Swedish conscript study showed this clearly; for those men that reported having taken cannabis on over 50 occasions by age 18 years, the odds of developing a schizophrenic illness increased
from ×2 (in those who endorsed ever having taken cannabis) to ×7 (Zammit et al. 2002). A recent
study from Di Forti and colleagues also found a clear relationship between the frequency of cannabis use and the chances of developing a psychotic illness (Di Forti et al. 2009).
37.2.3 Cannabis is a risk factor for schizophrenia

It has been pointed out repeatedly, that the use of cannabis is neither necessary nor sufficient for
the development of schizophrenia. People can develop schizophrenia having never taken cannabis,
and millions of people worldwide have used cannabis without developing a major mental illness. But
the same can be said for cigarettes and lung cancer (where the risk is much higher). It is perhaps
more useful to consider cannabis use as a risk factor (or component cause) for major mental illness, in the same way that there are risk factors for cardiovascular disease, such as high-fat diet,
cigarette smoking, etc. (Castle 2013).
37.2.3.1 Interactions between cannabis use and other risk factors

for schizophrenia

A major theme has been to clarify which additional factors interact with cannabis to confer risk.
Some studies have investigated the interaction between cannabis and known environmental risk
factors (such as being brought up in an urban versus a rural setting, or having a history of maltreatment in childhood) (van Os et al. 2010). In general, an additive effect has been observed between
cannabis use and these other risk factors, but whether it is super-additive (synergistic) remains
uncertain (Harley et al. 2010; Houston et al. 2008, 2011; Konings et al. 2012; Kuepper et al. 2011).

Recreational Cannabis: The Risk of Schizophrenia

37.2.3.2 Cannabis use and susceptibility genes

Why only a minority of cannabis users develop psychosis has attracted a lot of attention. It is
suspected that particular genetic variants modulate the risk of cannabis for users in terms of psychosis outcomes. Polymorphic variations in dopamine components and in postdopamine signaling have attracted the most interest. Initial work implicated an interaction between cannabis and
a functional polymorphism in the gene for catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) (Caspi et al.
2005), and this interaction received support in laboratory- and community-based experimental
studies (Henquet et al. 2006, 2009). However, two further epidemiological studies have been negative (Zammit et al. 2007, 2011).
More recently two independent groups have observed an interaction between cannabis and
polymorphic variation at rs2494732 in the gene for the intracellular enzyme AKT1. This is an
intermediate between neurotrophin receptors and mRNA translation within dendritic spines, and
is involved in postdopamine receptor signaling on the pathway to GSK3Beta. Both studies found
that, in conjunction with cannabis use, people who had the CC (cytosine, cytosine) genotype at
rs2494732 were twice as likely as those with the TT (thymine, thymine) genotype to develop a
psychotic disorder (Di Forti et al. 2012; van Winkel et al. 2011).
37.2.4 The age of cannabis onset

The risk of cannabis in terms of adverse mental health outcomes also depends on the age when
the subject begins to use cannabis. There appears to be a higher risk for use that starts in early/
mid adolescence compared to use that begins in adulthood (Arseneault et al. 2002; McGrath et al.
2010; Schubart et al. 2011b). An appealing explanation is that cannabis impacts upon the developing neural networks. Some animal studies, but not all (O’Shea et al. 2006), support the idea that
the sustained adverse consequences of cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1) agonists on cognition
and social interaction arise if the drug is administered during maturation as opposed to adulthood (O’Shea et al. 2004; Quinn et al. 2008; Schneider and Koch 2003). Certainly, and perhaps to
an even greater extent in higher primates, there is a massive reorganization of the nervous system
in adolescence. In humans, the reorganization of synapses occurs in parallel with the development
of abstract reasoning, and the emergence of social, philosophical, political, and lifestyle attitudes
(Citri and Malenka 2008). The implication is that cannabis has the ability to disrupt the unfolding
of the highest faculties of the nervous system, increasing the chances of future involvement with
mental health services. The long-term impact of cannabis on IQ also appears to be age dependent.
A recent longitudinal follow-up of the Dunedin birth cohort to age 38 has suggested that cannabis use has a detrimental effect on IQ and that this is also age dependent. And again it is the
adolescent period that appears to constitute the window of greatest vulnerability (Meier et al.
2012). However, confirmation is required before we can accept this striking finding.
37.2.5 The type of cannabis

Recent epidemiological studies have begun to explore the nuances of the cannabis–schizophrenia
relationship in more detail. One question in particular is whether sinsemilla—high THC: negligible cannabidiol (CBD) (Potter et al. 2008)—constitutes a higher risk for psychosis than traditional
cannabis products. This appears to be the case. A study from South London showed that patients
in the midst of their first psychotic breakdown and healthy matched controls were equally likely
to endorse ever having taken cannabis, but the probability of suffering from psychotic disorder
was almost seven times greater in those who had preferentially used sinsemilla (skunk) compared
with those who had used resin (hash) (Di Forti et al. 2009). The higher the frequency of sinsemilla

663

664

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

use, the higher the risk. Sinsemilla is largely devoid of CBD, which can pharmacologically antagonize some of the effects of THC (Pertwee 2008), and may have antipsychotic properties in its own
right (Leweke et al. 2012), suggesting that the higher risk of sinsemilla might be partly accounted
for by the absence of CBD rather than by elevated THC alone (Smith 2005). It has been argued
that users of sinsemilla might self-titrate their intake of THC, much in the same way that spirit
drinkers consume a lower volume of fluid than beer drinkers; however, if the critical factor is the
ratio of THC:CBD, then self-titration might be less important. Two epidemiological studies have
shown that the relative absence of CBD in cannabis products is associated with more positive
psychotic symptoms (Morgan and Curran 2008; Schubart et al. 2011a). This is in agreement with
laboratory-based studies in healthy controls in which doses of the two cannabinoids can be tightly
controlled (Englund et al. 2013; Morrison et al. 2010).
37.2.6 Heavy use of cannabis and cannabis addiction

The South London study also showed that a significant proportion of the general population use
cannabis (including sinsemilla) every day without obvious ill effects (Di Forti et al. 2009). Many
psychiatrists in clinical practice will encounter people who freely admit to having used cannabis,
all day, every day, beginning immediately on waking. Some initial reports have suggested that sinsemilla is more addictive than traditional forms of cannabis, and similar to the case with psychosis, the relative absence of CBD may be a factor (Morgan et al. 2010). Studies are now beginning
to explore whether CBD has efficacy against cannabis dependence.
It is now clear that cannabis dependence exists as a phenomenon (Swift et al. 2001), and there is
little doubt that a cannabis withdrawal syndrome exists, characterized by cravings, nervousness,
insomnia, nightmares, irritability, and abdominal pain (Allsop et al. 2012; Hasin et al. 2008). Not
surprisingly, people who experience the most severe withdrawals are much more likely to relapse
and begin taking cannabis again (Allsop et al. 2012). People who are addicted to cannabis suffer
poorer mental health generally compared to nondependent users, with elevated rates of mood disorders as well as psychotic disorders (Arias et al. 2013; van der Pol et al. 2013).
37.2.7 An acute cannabis-psychosis is a marker for the emergence

of schizophrenia

People who experience an acute psychotic episode following the use of cannabis, to the extent that
treatment is needed, are at high risk of going on to develop a chronic psychotic disorder (Arendt
et al. 2005). In a recent study from Finland (n = 18,478), 46% (95% confidence interval (CI),
35–57%) of people who had been hospitalized for cannabis induced psychosis developed schizophrenia over the next 8 years, compared to 30% (95% CI, 14–46%) who had been hospitalized
because of amphetamine-induced psychosis (Niemi-Pynttari et al. 2013). This suggests that acute
psychotic experiences following cannabis are not as benign as was once believed.
37.2.8 Summary

There is little doubt that some people run into problems with cannabis, as is the case for any recreational drug. The worry in regard to cannabis is that although it is relatively safe, so many young
people are consuming it that a minority end up putting their long-term mental health at risk.
Early, heavy, and dependent patterns of use clearly amplify any inherent risk of cannabis per se.
Sinsemilla appears to be more habit-forming than traditional forms of cannabis, and the evidence
that it constitutes an elevated risk for psychosis is now fairly robust. There may well be single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that determine how risky cannabis is (in terms of psychosis

Recreational Cannabis: The Risk of Schizophrenia

outcome) for a particular individual. Currently variation in the gene for AKT1 is the most convincing, although COMT has not been discounted. Small-scale genetic studies can be revealing
but carry the danger of false positives, and at the present time, there is no genetic test that can be
used clinically to estimate the risk of cannabis-addiction or cannabis-psychosis for a particular
individual.
But what we can say with some confidence is that the following patterns of cannabis use put
any individual at risk—particularly if the personality and mind are still maturing: (1) everyday
(dependent) use and (2) the use of high-potency products. Those with a family history of psychosis or with a psychosis-prone personality appear especially at risk. Finally, a history of an acute
cannabis-induced psychosis must be regarded as a “red flag” warning against further use.

37.3 Cannabis and psychosis: imaging correlates
While the evidence regarding the association between cannabis use and schizophrenia is fairly
robust and the various parameters that determine this relationship are increasingly clear, delineation of the underlying mechanism is important not only for a greater degree of confidence in
the nature of this relationship but also for a better understanding of the neurobiology of schizophrenia itself. The ideal approach to demonstrate this would be through naturalistic studies
that prospectively delineate the effect of cannabis exposure on neural function in the substrates
implicated in schizophrenia among healthy cannabis users and relate these changes to subsequent
transition to psychosis. However, such studies are logistically demanding and no data currently
exist that delineate the neural mechanisms underlying the increased risk for psychosis in such a
precise manner. Pharmacological challenge studies involving the administration of cannabis or
THC in combination with neuroimaging offer a way to reversibly model aspects of psychosis in
humans and understand their neural underpinnings.
37.3.1 Electrophysiological studies

At the cellular level, animal studies have clearly shown that THC and other CB1 agonists target
glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) terminals and impact upon glutamate and
GABA signaling within the central nervous system (Chevaleyre et al. 2006; Katona and Freund
2012). The hippocampus has been utilized as a model system to investigate the effects of cannabinoids on fine-grained neural network behavior. Cannabinoid CB1 agonists can disrupt the
synchronization of individual neurons within the hippocampus and disrupt oscillations within
the theta (4–8 Hz) and gamma (>40 Hz) range, and these effects on network electrical activity
show a close correlation with functional deficits in cognitive performance (Hajos et al. 2008;
Robbe et al. 2006). Electrical studies in humans are few in number, but similar findings have been
observed (Bocker et al. 2010). Our group found that intravenous THC decreased the amplitude,
synchronization, and consistency over time of theta oscillations in the frontal cortex with functional consequences at the level of the mind (Morrison et al. 2011; Stone et al. 2012).
37.3.2 Functional magnetic resonance imaging studies

Effects of a modest (10 mg) oral dose of THC on the blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD)
hemodynamic response have been investigated in healthy occasional cannabis users while performing verbal learning (Bhattacharyya et al. 2009) and attentional salience processing tasks
(Bhattacharyya et al. 2012a). THC disrupted the normal linear decrement in medial temporal
engagement while the subjects were learning new information. Furthermore, the normal relationship between medial temporal engagement and subsequent memory performance was no

665

666

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

longer present under the influence of THC (Bhattacharyya et al. 2009). Inefficient encoding of
contextual information in the parahippocampal cortex under the influence of THC appears to
result in greater parahippocampal engagement in an effort to maintain subsequent memory performance. This is consistent with evidence that THC impairs medial temporal function in animals
(Puighermanal et al. 2009; Robbe et al. 2006; Wise et al. 2009) and memory performance in animals and man (Curran et al. 2002; D’Souza et al. 2004; Puighermanal et al. 2009; Robbe et al. 2006;
Wise et al. 2009). While the subjects were recalling learnt information, THC augmented activation in the left medial prefrontal and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), areas that have been
related to retrieval monitoring and verification (Fleck et al. 2006; Simons et al. 2005) and attenuated left rostral ACC and bilateral striatal activation. The effect of THC on striatal function was
directly correlated with the severity of psychotic symptoms induced by it concurrently, suggesting
that the acute induction of psychotic symptoms by THC is related to its effects on striatal function. Consistent with this, THC has been shown to attenuate activation in the right caudate during
the processing of “salient” oddball stimuli relative to “nonsalient” standard stimuli (Bhattacharyya
et al. 2012a). THC also reduced the response latency to standard relative to oddball stimuli, suggesting that THC may have made the nonsalient stimuli to appear relatively more salient.
In one recent study (Bhattacharyya et al. 2012b), the acute effects of THC on striatal and midbrain activation were shown to be greater in those individuals who carried the risk variants of
genes modulating central dopaminergic neurotransmission, such as the AKT1 and dopamine
transporter (DAT1) genes. This awaits replication.
37.3.3 Neurochemical imaging studies

Evidence regarding the effects of THC on central dopamine neurotransmission has been equivocal. The first human study, using positron emission tomography (PET) (Bossong et al. 2009),
reported a modest increase in striatal dopamine levels as evident from an approximately 3.5%
decrease in the binding of [11C] raclopride in the ventral striatum and precommissural dorsal
putamen after THC inhalation. However, another study employing the same PET technique
(Stokes et al. 2009) found no significant effect of orally administered THC on striatal [11C] raclopride binding; curiously, the same group (Stokes et al. 2009) reported an effect of THC on dopamine release in extrastriatal brain regions such as the lateral prefrontal cortex (Stokes et al. 2010).
A more recent study using 123I-iodobenzamide ([123I]IBZM) single photon emission tomography
(SPET) found no evidence of a significant effect of intravenously administered THC on indices of striatal dopamine (Barkus et al. 2011). While various factors such as different routes of
administration, magnitude of previous exposure to cannabis in study participants and differing
genetically moderated sensitivity to the effects of THC may account for these discrepant results,
nevertheless they point towards a relatively modest effect of THC on central dopamine neurotransmission, at most, as measured using neurochemical imaging techniques. Kuepper and colleagues (personal communication) have suggested that schizophrenic patients and their relatives
show a greater effect of THC on striatal dopamine, possibly reflecting their genetic vulnerability.
37.3.4 Summary of neural mechanisms

It is evident that THC, the phytocannabinoid that is principally linked to psychotic symptoms
and disorder, has an effect on the synchronicity of neural oscillations and on brain regions such as
the medial temporal and prefrontal cortex and the striatum, consistent with similar abnormalities
reported in schizophrenia (Ford et al. 2007; van Os and Kapur 2009) and complementary evidence of alterations of the endocannabinoid system in schizophrenia (Marco et al. 2011). The key

Recreational Cannabis: The Risk of Schizophrenia

functional magnetic resonance imaging finding of interest regarding the neurobiological basis of
the link between cannabis use and psychosis, relate to the acute effect of THC on striatal activity
which were directly related to the severity of transient psychotic symptoms induced experimentally under its influence (Bhattacharyya et al. 2012a, 2012b). While the precise neurochemical
mechanisms underlying these effects of THC are unclear, THC is known to alter central dopamine transmission in animals (Bossong et al. 2009; Stokes et al. 2010) and perturbed dopamine
function may be a key factor in the inappropriate attribution of salience to environmental stimuli
or events (Berridge 2007; Kapur et al. 2005). It is thought that striatal dopamine dysfunction
leads to the development of psychotic symptoms through an effect on salience processing (Kapur
2003). Thus, one possibility is that THC present in cannabis alters the processing of salient and
nonsalient stimuli and the induction of psychotic symptoms through its effects on striatal dopamine function. Another possibility, which is in agreement with animal work, is that THC disrupts
the synchronized neural rhythms that depend on reciprocal glutamatergic and GABAergic connections (Ford and Mathalon 2008; Robbe et al. 2006; Uhlhaas et al. 2008) interfering with the
spatiotemporal connectivity within the brain.

37.4 Conclusions and future directions
The majority of people who use cannabis do not develop schizophrenia. However, there is little
doubt that cannabis can elicit an acute psychosis, worsens the course of pre-existing schizophrenia, and is a risk factor for the development of schizophrenia. Cannabis use beginning in adolescence, heavy use, and the use of high THC:low CBD strains are known to increase the risk whilst a
transient cannabis-induced psychotic episode requiring hospitalization is a critical warning sign.
Genetic variation is believed to impact on the risk of cannabis, and at present the most consistent
evidence is an interaction between cannabis use and a SNP in the gene coding for the intracellular
enzyme AKT1. At the synaptic cellular level and local network levels, the mechanisms of THC are
well understood—disruption of glutamate and GABA signaling, and disruption of network oscillations. Disruption of oscillations has now been observed in humans using electroencephalography with functional correlates at the level of the mind. Cerebral blood flow changes in response
to individual cannabinoids have been characterized under numerous cognitive demands. To date,
neurochemical imaging has focused on dopamine. However, acute THC, in healthy subjects,
appears to have a negligible effect on striatal dopamine release. Whether schizophrenic patients
and their genetic relatives display a more sensitized dopamine system awaits demonstration.

References
Allsop, D.J., Copeland, J., Norberg, M.M., et al. (2012). Quantifying the clinical significance of cannabis
withdrawal. PLoS One, 7, e44864.
Andreasson, S., Allebeck, P., Engstrom, A., and Rydberg, U. (1987). Cannabis and schizophrenia. A longitudinal study of Swedish conscripts. Lancet, 2, 1483–1486.
Arendt, M., Rosenberg, R., Foldager, L., Perto, G., and Munk-Jorgensen, P. (2005). Cannabis-induced
psychosis and subsequent schizophrenia-spectrum disorders: follow-up study of 535 incident cases.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 187, 510–515.
Arias, F., Szerman, N., Vega, P., et al. (2013). Abuse or dependence on cannabis and other psychiatric disorders. Madrid study on dual pathology prevalence. Actas Espanolas de Psiquiatria, 41, 122–129.
Arseneault, L., Cannon, M., Poulton, R., Murray, R., Caspi, A., and Moffitt, T.E. (2002). Cannabis use in
adolescence and risk for adult psychosis: longitudinal prospective study. British Medical Journal, 325,
1212–1213.

667

668

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Arseneault, L., Cannon, M., Witton, J., and Murray, R.M. (2004). Causal association between cannabis
and psychosis: examination of the evidence. British Journal of Psychiatry, 184, 110–117.
Bahorik, A.L., Newhill, C.E., and Eack, S.M. (2013). Characterizing the longitudinal patterns of substance
use among individuals diagnosed with serious mental illness after psychiatric hospitalization. Addiction,
108, 1259–1269.
Barkus, E., Morrison, P.D., Vuletic, D., et al. (2011). Does intravenous Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol
increase dopamine release? A SPET study. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 25, 1462–1468.
Barnes, T.R., Mutsatsa, S.H., Hutton, S.B., Watt, H.C., and Joyce, E.M. (2006). Comorbid substance use
and age at onset of schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry, 188, 237–242.
Barrigon, M.L., Gurpegui, M., Ruiz-Veguilla, M., et al. (2010). Temporal relationship of first-episode nonaffective psychosis with cannabis use: a clinical verification of an epidemiological hypothesis. Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 44, 413–420.
Berridge, K.C. (2007). The debate over dopamine’s role in reward: the case for incentive salience.
Psychopharmacology, 191, 391–431.
Bhattacharyya, S., Atakan, Z., Martin-Santos, R., et al. (2012b). Preliminary report of biological basis of
sensitivity to the effects of cannabis on psychosis: AKT1 and DAT1 genotype modulates the effects of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on midbrain and striatal function. Molecular Psychiatry, 17, 1152–1155.
Bhattacharyya, S., Crippa, J.A., Allen, P., et al. (2012a). Induction of psychosis by Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol reflects modulation of prefrontal and striatal function during attentional salience
processing. Archives of General Psychiatry, 69, 27–36.
Bhattacharyya, S., Fusar-Poli, P., Borgwardt, S., et al. (2009). Modulation of mediotemporal and ventrostriatal function in humans by Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol: a neural basis for the effects of Cannabis
sativa on learning and psychosis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66, 442–451.
Bocker, K.B., Hunault, C.C., Gerritsen, J., Kruidenier, M., Mensinga, T.T., and Kenemans, J.L. (2010).
Cannabinoid modulations of resting state EEG theta power and working memory are correlated in
humans. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22, 1906–1916.
Bossong, M.G., van Berckel, B.N., Boellaard, R., et al. (2009). Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol induces dopamine release in the human striatum. Neuropsychopharmacology, 34, 759–766.
Buhler, B., Hambrecht, M., Loffler, W., an der Heiden, W., and Hafner, H. (2002). Precipitation and
determination of the onset and course of schizophrenia by substance abuse – a retrospective and prospective study of 232 population-based first illness episodes. Schizophrenia Research, 54, 243–251.
Callaghan, R.C., Cunningham, J.K., Allebeck, P., et al. (2012). Methamphetamine use and schizophrenia:
a population-based cohort study in California. American Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 389–396.
Casadio, P., Fernandes, C., Murray, R.M., and Di Forti M. (2011). Cannabis use in young people: the risk
for schizophrenia. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 35, 1179–1187.
Caspi, A., Moffitt, T.E., Cannon, M., et al. (2005). Moderation of the effect of adolescent-onset cannabis
use on adult psychosis by a functional polymorphism in the catechol-O-methyltransferase gene: longitudinal evidence of a gene X environment interaction. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 1117–1127.
Castle, D.J. (2013). Cannabis and psychosis: what causes what? F1000 Med Rep, 5, 1.
Chevaleyre, V., Takahashi, K.A., and Castillo, P.E. (2006). Endocannabinoid-mediated synaptic plasticity
in the CNS. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 29, 37–76.
Citri, A. and Malenka, R. C. (2008). Synaptic plasticity: multiple forms, functions, and mechanisms.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 33, 18–41.
Curran, H.V., Brignell, C., Fletcher, S., Middleton, P., and Henry, J. (2002). Cognitive and subjective
dose-response effects of acute oral Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in infrequent cannabis users.
Psychopharmacology, 164, 61–70.
D’Souza, D.C., Abi-Saab, W.M., Madonick, S., et al. (2005). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol effects in schizophrenia: implications for cognition, psychosis, and addiction. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 594–608.

Recreational Cannabis: The Risk of Schizophrenia

D’Souza, D.C., Perry, E., MacDougall, L., et al. (2004). The psychotomimetic effects of intravenous delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in healthy individuals: implications for psychosis. Neuropsychopharmacology,
29, 1558–1572.
Degenhardt, L., Tennant, C., Gilmour, S., et al. (2007). The temporal dynamics of relationships between
cannabis, psychosis and depression among young adults with psychotic disorders: findings from a
10-month prospective study. Psychological Medicine, 37, 927–934.
Dekker, N., Meijer, J., Koeter, M., et al. (2012). Age at onset of non-affective psychosis in relation to cannabis use, other drug use and gender. Psychological Medicine, 42, 1903–1911.
Di Forti, M., Iyegbe, C., Sallis, H., et al. (2012). Confirmation that the AKT1 (rs2494732) genotype influences the risk of psychosis in cannabis users. Biological Psychiatry, 72, 811–816.
Di Forti, M., Morgan, C., Dazzan, P., et al. (2009). High-potency cannabis and the risk of psychosis. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 195, 488–491.
Englund, A., Morrison, P.D., Nottage, J., et al. (2013). Cannabidiol inhibits THC-elicited paranoid symptoms and hippocampal-dependent memory impairment. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 27, 19–27.
Ferdinand, R.F., Sondeijker, F., van der Ende, J., Selten, J.P., Huizink, A., and Verhulst, F.C. (2005).
Cannabis use predicts future psychotic symptoms, and vice versa. Addiction, 100, 612–618.
Fergusson, D.M., Horwood, L.J., and Ridder, E.M. (2005). Tests of causal linkages between cannabis use
and psychotic symptoms. Addiction, 100, 354–366.
Fleck, M.S., Daselaar, S.M., Dobbins, I.G., and Cabeza, R. (2006). Role of prefrontal and anterior cingulate
regions in decision-making processes shared by memory and nonmemory tasks. Cerebral Cortex, 16,
1623–1630.
Ford, J.M., Krystal, J.H., and Mathalon, D.H. (2007). Neural synchrony in schizophrenia: from networks
to new treatments. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 33, 848–852.
Ford, J.M. and Mathalon, D.H. (2008). Neural synchrony in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34,
904–906.
Foti, D.J., Kotov, R., Guey, L.T., and Bromet, E.J. (2010). Cannabis use and the course of schizophrenia:
10-year follow-up after first hospitalization. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 987–993.
Gage, S.H., Zammit, S., and Hickman, M. (2013). Stronger evidence is needed before accepting that cannabis plays an important role in the aetiology of schizophrenia in the population. F1000 Med Rep, 5, 2.
Gonzalez-Pinto, A., Vega, P., Ibanez, B., et al. (2008). Impact of cannabis and other drugs on age at onset
of psychosis. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 1210–1216.
Grech, A., Van Os, J., Jones, P.B., Lewis, S.W., and Murray, R.M. (2005). Cannabis use and outcome of
recent onset psychosis. European Psychiatry, 20, 349–353.
Gunderson, E.W., Haughey, H.M., Ait-Daoud, N., Joshi, A.S., and Hart, C.L. (2012). “Spice” and “K2”
herbal highs: a case series and systematic review of the clinical effects and biopsychosocial implications
of synthetic cannabinoid use in humans. American Journal of Addiction, 21, 320–326.
Hajos, M., Hoffmann, W.E., and Kocsis, B. (2008). Activation of cannabinoid-1 receptors disrupts sensory
gating and neuronal oscillation: relevance to schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry, 63, 1075–1083.
Hall, W. (2006). Is cannabis use psychotogenic? Lancet, 367, 193–195.
Harley, M., Kelleher, I., Clarke, M., et al. (2010). Cannabis use and childhood trauma interact additively to
increase the risk of psychotic symptoms in adolescence. Psychological Medicine, 40, 1627–1634.
Hasin, D.S., Keyes, K.M., Alderson, D., Wang, S., Aharonovich, E., and Grant, B.F. (2008). Cannabis
withdrawal in the United States: results from NESARC. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 1354–1363.
Henquet, C., Krabbendam, L., Spauwen, J., et al. (2005b). Prospective cohort study of cannabis use,
predisposition for psychosis, and psychotic symptoms in young people. British Medical Journal, 330,
11–14.
Henquet, C., Murray, R., Linszen, D., and van Os, J. (2005a). The environment and schizophrenia: the role
of cannabis use. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 31, 608–612.

669

670

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Henquet, C., Rosa, A., Delespaul, P., et al. (2009). COMT ValMet moderation of cannabis-induced psychosis: a momentary assessment study of ‘switching on’ hallucinations in the flow of daily life. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 119, 156–160.
Henquet, C., Rosa, A., Krabbendam, L., et al. (2006). An experimental study of catechol-o-methyltransferase val(158)met moderation of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-induced effects on psychosis and cognition. Neuropsychopharmacology, 31, 2748–2757.
Hides, L., Dawe, S., Kavanagh, D.J., and Young, R.M. (2006). Psychotic symptom and cannabis relapse in
recent-onset psychosis. Prospective study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 189, 137–143.
Houston, J.E., Murphy, J., Adamson, G., Stringer, M., and Shevlin, M. (2008). Childhood sexual abuse,
early cannabis use, and psychosis: testing an interaction model based on the National Comorbidity
Survey. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34, 580–585.
Houston, J.E., Murphy, J., Shevlin, M., and Adamson, G. (2011). Cannabis use and psychosis: re-visiting
the role of childhood trauma. Psychological Medicine, 41, 2339–2348.
Kapur, S. (2003). Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: a framework linking biology, phenomenology,
and pharmacology in schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 13–23.
Kapur, S., Mizrahi, R., and Li, M. (2005). From dopamine to salience to psychosis--linking biology, pharmacology and phenomenology of psychosis. Schizophrenia Research, 79, 59–68.
Katona, I. and Freund, T.F. (2012). Multiple functions of endocannabinoid signaling in the brain. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 35, 529–558.
Konings, M., Stefanis, N., Kuepper, R., et al. (2012). Replication in two independent population-based
samples that childhood maltreatment and cannabis use synergistically impact on psychosis risk.
Psychological Medicine, 42, 149–159.
Kuepper, R., van Os, J., Lieb, R., Wittchen, H.U., and Henquet, C. (2011). Do cannabis and urbanicity
co-participate in causing psychosis? Evidence from a 10-year follow-up cohort study. Psychological
Medicine, 41, 2121–2129.
Large, M., Sharma, S., Compton, M.T., Slade, T., and Nielssen, O. (2011). Cannabis use and earlier onset
of psychosis: a systematic meta-analysis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 555–561.
Lauronen, E., Miettunen, J., Veijola, J., Karhu, M., Jones, P.B., and Isohanni, M. (2007). Outcome and its
predictors in schizophrenia within the Northern Finland 1966 Birth Cohort. European Psychiatry, 22,
129–136.
Leweke, F.M., Piomelli, D., Pahlisch, F., et al. (2012). Cannabidiol enhances anandamide signaling and
alleviates psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia. Translational Psychiatry, 2, e94.
Marco, E.M., Garcia-Gutierrez, M.S., Bermudez-Silva, F.J., et al. (2011). Endocannabinoid system and
psychiatry: in search of a neurobiological basis for detrimental and potential therapeutic effects.
Frontiers in Behavioural Neuroscience, 5, 63.
McGrath, J., Welham, J., Scott, J., et al. (2010). Association between cannabis use and psychosis-related
outcomes using sibling pair analysis in a cohort of young adults. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67,
440–447.
Meier, M.H., Caspi, A., Ambler, A., et al. (2012). Persistent cannabis users show neuropsychological
decline from childhood to midlife. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 109, E2657–E2664.
Moore, T.H., Zammit, S., Lingford-Hughes, A., et al. (2007). Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or affective mental health outcomes: a systematic review. Lancet, 370, 319–328.
Morgan, C.J. and Curran, H.V. (2008). Effects of cannabidiol on schizophrenia-like symptoms in people
who use cannabis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 192, 306–307.
Morgan, C.J., Freeman, T.P., Schafer, G.L., and Curran, H.V. (2010). Cannabidiol attenuates the
appetitive effects of Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in humans smoking their chosen cannabis.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 35, 1879–1885.

Recreational Cannabis: The Risk of Schizophrenia

Morrison, P.D., Murray, R.M., and Kapur, S. (2010). In healthy subjects cannabidiol inhibits delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol induced acute psychosis and tachycardia via a non-pharmacokinetic mechanism.
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 24, A61.
Morrison, P.D., Nottage, J., Stone, J. M., et al. (2011). Disruption of frontal theta coherence by Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol is associated with positive psychotic symptoms. Neuropsychopharmacology, 36,
827–836.
Morrison, P.D., Zois, V., McKeown, D.A., et al. (2009). The acute effects of synthetic intravenous Delta9tetrahydrocannabinol on psychosis, mood and cognitive functioning. Psychological Medicine, 39,
1607–1616.
Murray, R.M., Morrison, P.D., Henquet, C., and Di Forti, M. (2007). Cannabis, the mind and society: the
hash realities. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 885–895.
Myles, N., Newall, H., Nielssen, O., and Large, M. (2012). The association between cannabis use and earlier age at onset of schizophrenia and other psychoses: meta-analysis of possible confounding factors.
Current Pharmaceutical Design, 18, 5055–5069.
Niemi-Pynttari, J.A., Sund, R., Putkonen, H., Vorma, H., Wahlbeck, K., and Pirkola, S.P. (2013).
Substance-induced psychoses converting into schizophrenia: a register-based study of 18,478 Finnish
inpatient cases. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 74, e94–e99.
O’Shea, M., McGregor, I.S., and Mallet, P.E. (2006). Repeated cannabinoid exposure during perinatal,
adolescent or early adult ages produces similar longlasting deficits in object recognition and reduced
social interaction in rats. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 20, 611–621.
O’Shea, M., Singh, M.E., McGregor, I.S., and Mallet, P.E. (2004). Chronic cannabinoid exposure produces lasting memory impairment and increased anxiety in adolescent but not adult rats. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 18, 502–508.
Pertwee, R.G. (2008). The diverse CB1 and CB2 receptor pharmacology of three plant cannabinoids: delta9tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and delta9-tetrahydrocannabivarin. British Journal of Pharmacology,
153, 199–215.
Potter, D.J., Clark, P., and Brown, M.B. (2008). Potency of delta 9-THC and other cannabinoids in cannabis in England in 2005: implications for psychoactivity and pharmacology. Journal of Forensic Sciences,
53, 90–94.
Puighermanal, E., Marsicano, G., Busquets-Garcia, A., Lutz, B., Maldonado, R., and Ozaita, A. (2009).
Cannabinoid modulation of hippocampal long-term memory is mediated by mTOR signaling. Nature
Neuroscience, 12, 1152–1158.
Quinn, H.R., Matsumoto, I., Callaghan, P.D., et al. (2008). Adolescent rats find repeated Delta(9)-THC
less aversive than adult rats but display greater residual cognitive deficits and changes in hippocampal
protein expression following exposure. Neuropsychopharmacology, 33, 1113–1126.
Robbe, D., Montgomery, S.M., Thome, A., Rueda-Orozco, P.E., McNaughton, B.L., and Buzsaki, G.
(2006). Cannabinoids reveal importance of spike timing coordination in hippocampal function. Nature
Neuroscience, 9, 1526–1533.
Rossler, W., Hengartner, M.P., Angst, J., and Ajdacic-Gross, V. (2012). Linking substance use with symptoms of subclinical psychosis in a community cohort over 30 years. Addiction, 107, 1174–1184.
Schneider, M. and Koch, M. (2003). Chronic pubertal, but not adult chronic cannabinoid treatment
impairs sensorimotor gating, recognition memory, and the performance in a progressive ratio task in
adult rats. Neuropsychopharmacology, 28, 1760–1769.
Schubart, C.D., Sommer, I.E., van Gastel, W.A., Goetgebuer, R.L., Kahn, R.S., and Boks, M.P. (2011a).
Cannabis with high cannabidiol content is associated with fewer psychotic experiences. Schizophrenia
Research, 130, 216–221.
Schubart, C.D., van Gastel, W.A., Breetvelt, E.J., et al. (2011b). Cannabis use at a young age is associated
with psychotic experiences. Psychological Medicine, 41, 1301–1310.

671

672

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Simons, J.S., Gilbert, S.J., Owen, A.M., Fletcher, P.C., and Burgess, P.W. (2005). Distinct roles for lateral and medial anterior prefrontal cortex in contextual recollection. Journal of Neurophysiology, 94,
813–820.
Smith, N. (2005). High potency cannabis: the forgotten variable. Addiction, 100, 1558–1560; author reply
1560–1561.
Stokes, P.R., Egerton, A., Watson, B., et al. (2010). Significant decreases in frontal and temporal
[11C]-raclopride binding after THC challenge. Neuroimage, 52, 1521–1527.
Stokes, P.R., Mehta, M.A., Curran, H.V., Breen, G., and Grasby, P.M. (2009). Can recreational doses of
THC produce significant dopamine release in the human striatum? Neuroimage, 48, 186–190.
Stone, J.M., Morrison, P.D., Brugger, S., et al. (2012). Communication breakdown: delta-9
tetrahydrocannabinol effects on pre-speech neural coherence. Molecular Psychiatry, 17, 568–569.
Sugranyes, G., Flamarique, I., Parellada, E., et al. (2009). Cannabis use and age of diagnosis of schizophrenia. European Journal of Psychiatry, 24, 282–286.
Swift, W., Hall, W., and Teesson, M. (2001). Characteristics of DSM-IV and ICD-10 cannabis dependence
among Australian adults: results from the National Survey of Mental Health and Wellbeing. Drug and
Alcohol Dependence, 63, 147–153.
Tien, A.Y. and Anthony, J.C. (1990). Epidemiological analysis of alcohol and drug use as risk factors for
psychotic experiences. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 178, 473–480.
Tosato, S., Lasalvia, A., Bonetto, C., et al. (2013). The impact of cannabis use on age of onset and clinical
characteristics in first-episode psychotic patients. Data from the Psychosis Incident Cohort Outcome
Study (PICOS). Journal of Psychiatric Research, 47, 438–444.
Uhlhaas, P.J., Haenschel, C., Nikolic, D., and Singer, W. (2008). The role of oscillations and synchrony in
cortical networks and their putative relevance for the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 34, 927–943.
Van der Pol, P., Liebregts, N., de Graaf, R., et al. (2013). Mental health differences between frequent cannabis users with and without dependence and the general population. Addiction, 108, 1459–1469.
Van Os, J., Bak, M., Hanssen, M., Bijl, R. V., de Graaf, R., and Verdoux, H. (2002). Cannabis use and psychosis: a longitudinal population-based study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 156, 319–327.
Van Os, J. and Kapur, S. (2009). Schizophrenia. Lancet, 374, 635–645.
Van Os, J., Kenis, G., and Rutten, B.P. (2010). The environment and schizophrenia. Nature, 468,
203–212.
Van Winkel, R. (2011). Family-based analysis of genetic variation underlying psychosis-inducing effects of
cannabis: sibling analysis and proband follow-up. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 148–157.
Veen, N.D., Selten, J.P., van der Tweel, I., Feller, W.G., Hoek, H.W., and Kahn, R.S. (2004). Cannabis use
and age at onset of schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 501–506.
Verdoux, H., Gindre, C., Sorbara, F., Tournier, M., and Swendsen, J.D. (2003). Effects of cannabis and
psychosis vulnerability in daily life: an experience sampling test study. Psychological Medicine, 33,
23–32.
Weiser, M., Knobler, H.Y., Noy, S., and Kaplan, Z. (2002). Clinical characteristics of adolescents later hospitalized for schizophrenia. American Journal of Medical Genetics, 114, 949–955.
Wise, L.E., Thorpe, A.J., and Lichtman, A.H. (2009). Hippocampal CB1 receptors mediate the memory
impairing effects of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Neuropsychopharmacology, 34, 2072–2080.
Wobrock, T., Falkai, P., Schneider-Axmann, T., et al. (2013). Comorbid substance abuse in first-episode
schizophrenia: effects on cognition and psychopathology in the EUFEST study. Schizophrenia Research,
147, 132–139.
Zammit, S., Allebeck, P., Andreasson, S., Lundberg, I., and Lewis, G. (2002). Self reported cannabis use
as a risk factor for schizophrenia in Swedish conscripts of 1969: historical cohort study. British Medical
Journal, 325, 1199–1201.

Recreational Cannabis: The Risk of Schizophrenia

Zammit, S., Arseneault, L., Cannon, M., and Murray, R.M. (2012). Does cannabis use cause schizophrenia? The epidemiological evidence. In: D. Castle, R.M. Murray, and C. D’Souza (eds.). Marijuana and
Madness. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 169–183.
Zammit, S., Owen, M.J., Evans, J., Heron, J., and Lewis, G. (2011). Cannabis, COMT and psychotic experiences. British Journal of Psychiatry, 199, 380–385.
Zammit, S., Spurlock, G., Williams, H., et al. (2007). Genotype effects of CHRNA7, CNR1 and COMT in
schizophrenia: interactions with tobacco and cannabis use. British Journal of Psychiatry, 191, 402–407.

673

Chapter 38

Nonpsychological Adverse Effects
Franjo Grotenhermen

38.1 Introduction
Scientists generally agree on the acute and short-lasting physical effects of cannabis products,
while questions and controversy remain with regard to possible chronic and long-term effects,
for example, effects on the fetus. But there are also some unanswered questions on acute physical
effects, mainly with regard to severe cardiovascular consequences.
This review will concentrate on the toxicity of cannabis and its main psychoactive constituent
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC, dronabinol). This restriction is justified by the fact that cannabis
used recreationally usually contains high THC concentrations of 2–25% and low concentrations
of other cannabinoids as well as the fact that the main problems concerning adverse effects are
associated with cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1) receptor activation. In recent years cannabis
strains high in CBD (cannabidiol), which has a very favorable side effect profile, became available
and this issue will be covered also in brief. It is not easy to draw a clear line between those effects
that are sought after by the recreational user and adverse effects. Desirable effects for one user may
be unwanted for another. This is not only the case for psychological effects but also for somatic
effects such as increased appetite with THC and blocking of THC effects on appetite with CBD.
Most important physical adverse effects of cannabis are related to the pulmonary effects of
smoking cannabis. However, these effects are not attributable to any inherent cannabis compounds but instead to combustion products generated when dried plant material is smoked
rather than taken orally or through other advisable modes of administration such as vaporization. In addition, there are increasing concerns among scientists about major adverse effects of
severe cannabis prohibition exerted by many governments. Detrimental consequences to the
user range from poisoning by adulterants of illegal products to the death penalty. Detrimental
effects to society range from a high economic burden from the prosecution of criminal activities, to the corruption and destruction of civil societies, mainly in certain countries of Africa and
South America.

38.2 Overall toxicity
The acute toxicity of THC is low. Acute lethal human toxicity for cannabis has not been substantiated. The median lethal dose (LD50) of oral THC in rats was 800–1900 mg/kg depending on sex
and strain (Thompson et al. 1973). There were no cases of death due to toxicity following the
maximum THC dose in dogs (up to 3000 mg/kg THC) and monkeys (up to 9000 mg/kg THC).
The long-term use of cannabis was not associated with an increased mortality in animals
(Chan et al. 1996). Chan et al. (1996) administered 50 mg/kg THC to rats for a period of 2 years.
At the end of the observation overall survival was higher in the treated animals (70%) than
in the untreated controls (45%), which was attributed to the lower incidence of cancer in the

Nonpsychological Adverse Effects

Box 38.1 Possible physical adverse effects of cannabis
◆
◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

Overall toxicity: insufficient evidence of cannabis use on all-cause mortality.
Psychomotor performance: reduced coordination of movements; altered perception of
time; changes in visual perception; reduced attention; disturbances of short-term memory;
reduced reaction time; reduced multitasking capacity.
Traffic and other accidents: dose-dependent increase of traffic accidents by about a factor
of 2; dose dependency much weaker than with alcohol; inconclusive results concerning a
possible increase of other accidents (falls at home, etc.).
Circulation: tachycardia; changes in blood pressure; orthostatic hypotension; syncope;
heart attacks; arteritis (?); stroke (?).
Digestive tract: reduced production of saliva with dried mouth; periodontitis; caries;
cyclic vomiting in some chronic users; reduced pacemaker frequency of stomach motility;
delayed gastric emptying; moderately reduced to no reduced bowel movements.
Hormonal system and fertility: decreased sperm count in very heavy users without impairment of function; inconclusive effects on menstrual cycle length; transient decrease of prolactin and LH; inconclusive evidence on fertility in males and females; transient increase in
plasma cortisol level; no influence on insulin; impaired glucose tolerance after high doses,
increase in ghrelin and leptin; decrease in peptide YY.
Pregnancy and fetal development: shorter duration of pregnancy; inconsistent evidence on
possible reduced birth weight; subtle disturbances of cerebral development; subtle cognitive impairment in children exposed to THC in utero; lower school achievement.
Immune system: shift of Th1 and Th2 lymphocytes; decrease of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(IFN-γ, IL-2, tumour necrosis factor-alpha); complex effects on HIV/AIDS with unfavorable and favorable actions.
Liver: possible increased risk of liver cirrhosis and fatty liver in patients with hepatitis C with
heavy use.
Eye: reddening of the eyes; slowed pupils’ reaction to light; reduced tear flow; decreased eye
blink rates.
Skin: reduced pigmentation induced by ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation.

THC groups. A literature review on human studies concluded that there is currently insufficient
evidence to assess whether the all-cause mortality rate is elevated among cannabis users or not
(Calabria et al. 2010) (see Box 38.1).
Alcohol is generally regarded as much more dangerous by scientists than cannabis. According
to a ranking published in The Lancet, alcohol was most harmful, with a score of 72, followed by
heroin with 55. Among some of the other drugs assessed were cocaine (27), tobacco (26), cannabis (20), and benzodiazepines (15) (Nutt et al. 2010).

38.3 Interindividual variability of adverse effects
There is a large interindividual variation of tolerated doses, which is illustrated by the different
daily doses tolerated by patients in clinical studies, which may range from 2.5 to 120 mg THC
(Wade et al. 2004).

675

676

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Since tolerance develops to central and peripheral effects of THC, regular cannabis users may
tolerate considerably higher doses. In a study by Bowman and Phil on cognitive performance of
cannabis users in Jamaica, participants reported a mean daily intake of about 24.5 g cannabis, corresponding to about 1000 mg THC (Bowman and Phil 1973). Today, many heavy regular cannabis
users smoke 5 g or even 10 g of dried cannabis flowers with high THC content achieving daily
doses even above 1000 mg THC (personal communications).
Genetic variations and polymorphisms of constituents of the endocannabinoid system, including cannabinoid receptors and enzymes that catalyze the production or degradation of endocannabinoids, may influence susceptibility to cannabinoids, for example, the risk of developing
anxiety disorders from cannabis use (Heitland et al. 2012). Certain diseases and severe stress may
be associated with changes of cannabinoid receptor density, which may alter tolerance to cannabis
(Campos et al. 2012; Van Laere et al. 2010).

38.4 Psychomotor performance
Cannabis effects include disturbances of fine motor control and coordination, a reduction in
psychomotor activity, and prolonged, but also unaffected, reaction times (Chait and Pierri 1989;
Leweke et al. 1998). In addition, the clinically reported aberrations in visual perception (Carlin
et al. 1972; Leweke et al. 1999) and the subjective overestimation of the duration of a given time
period (Jones and Stone 1970) have been replicated under experimental conditions (see Box
38.1). However, frequent cannabis users estimated time correctly (Sewell et al. 2013). Multitasking
capacity is reduced (Wetherell et al. 2012). Attentional inhibition is enhanced, changing the way
mental tasks are performed under the influence of cannabis (Vivas et al. 2012). In regular cannabis users the drug produced only minimal effects on complex cognitive task performance, a
clear indication of tolerance (Hart et al. 2001). There was an increase in functional interactions
between the prefrontal cortex and the occipitoparietal cortex in regular cannabis smokers compared to nonusers, which may have a compensatory role in mitigating cannabis-related impairments (Harding et al. 2012).

38.5 Traffic and other accidents
THC impairs perception, psychomotor performance, and cognitive and affective functions, which
may all contribute to a driver’s increased risk of causing a traffic accident. After alcohol, cannabis and benzodiazepines are the drugs most frequently found in impaired drivers and in drivers
involved in accidents (Jones et al. 2003; Tunbridge et al. 2000). In a large case–control study conducted in the US, the presence of THC or its metabolites in blood or urine was associated with an
increase in potentially unsafe driving actions of 29% compared to an increase of 101% for drivers
with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.05% or more (Bédard et al. 2007).
Some of the impairment caused by cannabis is mitigated since subjects appear to perceive that
they are indeed impaired (Smiley 1999). Where they can compensate, they do, for example, by
not overtaking, by slowing down, and by focusing their attention when they know a response
will be required. Such compensation is not always possible, however, where drivers are faced with
unexpected events.
The two major responsibility studies conducted so far underline the importance of alcohol
as the major causal factor in traffic accidents (Drummer et al. 2004; Laumon et al. 2005). The
responsibility study by Drummer et al. (2004), conducted in Australia and using information on
3398 fatally injured drivers, showed an odds ratio (OR) of 6.0 for alcohol above a blood alcohol

Nonpsychological Adverse Effects

concentration (BAC) of 0.05% with an OR of 3.7 for the BAC range of 0.1–0.15% and of 25 for
a BAC of more than 0.2% (Drummer et al. 2004). THC was associated with an increased overall
risk of 2.7. A THC blood concentration of less than 5 ng/mL was associated with an OR of 0.7
(Drummer 2004, personal communication), while a blood concentration above 5 ng/mL was
associated with an OR of 6.6.
The French study by Laumon et al. (2005) with 9772 drivers involved in an accident, in which
at least one subject was fatally injured, found an OR of 8.5 for all alcohol positive drivers and an
OR of 1.8 for all THC positive drivers after adjustment for substances, age, time of accident, and
vehicle type (Laumon et al. 2005). A BAC of below 0.05% was associated with an OR of 2.7 and a
BAC of above 0.2% with an OR of 39.6.
Similarly, according to a review, acute cannabis use increases the risk of traffic accidents only
by a factor of 2 (see Box 38.1), far below the risk caused by alcohol (Asbridge et al. 2012). Driving
under the influence of cannabis was associated with a significantly increased risk of motor vehicle
collisions compared with unimpaired driving (OR: 1.9). Collision risk estimates were higher in
case–control studies (OR: 2.8) and studies of fatal collisions (OR: 2.1) than in culpability studies
(OR: 1.65) and studies on nonfatal collisions (OR: 1.7).
Drivers who switch from alcohol to cannabis use may reduce their accident risk. The first study
on the relationship between laws on the medicinal use of cannabis in the US and traffic deaths
found a nearly 9% drop in traffic deaths and a 5% reduction in beer sales (Anderson and Rees 2011).
The results of studies on the correlation between cannabis use and injuries from a range of
different kinds of accident requiring hospitalization are somewhat conflicting. Vinson found no
increased risk for cannabis users in 2161 injured subjects requiring emergency room treatment and
1856 controls (Vinson 2006). Among the cases, 27% were injured in a fall, 19% were struck by an
object, 18% were in a motor vehicle crash, and the rest were injured in a variety of other ways. Selfreported cannabis use in the previous 7 days was associated in this study with a decreased risk of
injury, while the use of other illicit drugs and recent use of alcohol was associated with an increased
risk. In contrast, a study by Gerberich et al. (2003) found a small increased risk of hospitalized
injury in cannabis users. In their retrospective study with 64,657 subjects who completed a questionnaire about health behaviors including cannabis use, that use was independently associated in
the follow-up with an increased risk for injury hospitalizations of 1.28 for men and 1.37 for women.

38.6 Circulation
THC produces reversible and dose-dependent tachycardia with increased cardiac output and
oxygen demand and increased diastolic blood pressure (in horizontal position) associated with
a decreased parasympathetic tone (Clark et al. 1974) (see Box 38.1). Due to tolerance to these
effects, chronic use can lead to bradycardia (Jones et al. 1981). At higher doses, orthostatic
­hypotension may occur due to a dilation of blood vessels, which may result in dizziness and
syncope. Myocardial infarction may be triggered by THC due to these effects on circulation
(Mittleman et al. 2001). Dilation of blood vessels also causes conjunctival reddening. In a literature review on triggers of myocardial infarction cannabis use was estimated to be responsible for
0.8% of cases (Nawrot et al. 2011). In 3886 patients, who have survived myocardial infarction and
were followed for up to 18 years, there was no statistically significant association between cannabis use and mortality (Frost et al. 2013).
Chronic cannabis use was not associated with cardiovascular risk factors such as changes in
blood triglyceride levels and blood pressure in the longitudinal CARDIA study, which began in
1986 (Rodondi et al. 2006). In an animal model of atherosclerosis, low doses of THC inhibited

677

678

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

disease progression (Steffens et al. 2005). This was associated with a decreased interferon-gamma
(IFN-γ) secretion by lymphoid cells and reduced macrophage chemotaxis. Some groups (Hoyer
et al. 2011; Zhao et al. 2010), but not all (Willecke et al. 2011) obtained evidence that these protective effects were mediated by the cannabinoid CB2 receptor.
There are a few case reports of an association between arteriopathies such as Buerger’s disease and cannabis use, but it is unclear whether this is a “cause and effect” relationship since the
study subjects usually also smoked tobacco, which is the major risk factor for Buerger’s disease
(Grotenhermen 2010). About 60 cases of stroke related to cannabis use have been reported in the
literature. Proposed mechanisms of action are orthostatic hypotension with secondary impairment of the autoregulation of cerebral blood flow, reversible cerebral vasoconstrictive syndrome,
and multifocal intracranial stenosis, but the causal role of cannabis remains unclear since other
confounding factors (lifestyle, genetic factors) have to be considered (Wolff et al. 2013).

38.7 Digestive tract
THC has a cholinergic effect on the salivary glands leading to hyposalivation and dry mouth (see
Box 38.1). This effect is mediated by both CB1 and CB2 receptors (Kopach et al. 2012). In a longitudinal study the use of cannabis was associated with an approximately doubled risk of signs of
periodontitis (Thomson et al. 2008). Cannabis users have a similar risk of caries as tobacco smokers (Ditmyer et al. 2013; Schulz-Katterbach et al. 2009).
Several case series of cannabis-induced hyperemesis have been reported. In the largest series
with 98 patients with a history of recurrent vomiting with no other explanation for symptoms,
most used cannabis for more than 2 years before symptom onset (Simonetto et al. 2012). Of these,
52 reported relief of symptoms with hot showers or baths.
Cannabinoids induce a reduction in pacemaker frequency of stomach motility (Percie et al.
2010). Research on colon motility is somewhat conflicting. THC reduced postprandial colonic
motility and tone (Esfandyari et al. 2007) in one study and motility of the colon in patients with
irritable bowel syndrome during the fasting state in another (Wong et al. 2011), while a later controlled study did not find any effects of THC on food transit in stomach, small bowel, or colon
(Wong et al. 2012).

38.8 Hormonal system and fertility
Changes in human hormone levels due to acute cannabis or THC ingestion are minor and usually
remain in the normal range (Hollister 1986). Tolerance develops to these minor effects, however,
and even regular cannabis users demonstrate normal hormone levels. Reductions in male fertility by cannabis are reversible and only seen in animals at THC blood concentrations higher than
those found in chronic cannabis users (see Box 38.1). After several weeks of daily smoking 8–10
cannabis cigarettes a slight decrease in sperm count was observed in humans, without impairment
of their function (Hembree et al. 1978).
There is no conclusive evidence on any cannabis-associated influences on menstrual cycle
length, on the number of cycles without ovulation, or on plasma concentrations of estrogens,
progesterone, testosterone, prolactin, luteinizing hormone (LH) or follicle-stimulating hormone
in female cannabis users. A transient cannabis-induced suppression of prolactin and LH levels
was observed if the drug was inhaled during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle (Mendelson
et al. 1985). The follicular phase of the menstrual cycle may be prolonged in cannabis users (Jukic
et al. 2007).

Nonpsychological Adverse Effects

There are few epidemiological data on influences of cannabis on fertility, and these provide no
definitive answers. In an Indian study, 150 married male cannabis users that initiated cannabis
use shortly before marriage were compared to an equal number of opium users and nonusers of
drugs; 1% of nonusers, 2% of cannabis users, and 10% of opium users were childless (Chopra and
Jandu 1976). The sterility rate in bhang users (cannabis leaves) with an average daily consumption
of about 150 mg THC was lower (0.4%) than in nonusers, whereas the users of ganja and charas
(flowers and resin) with a daily consumption of about 300 mg THC was higher (5.7%).
Mueller et al. (1990) investigated effects on female sterility. There was a low increase of sterility
risk associated with cannabis use (OR: 1.7). The risk was only increased in occasional users and
not in more heavy users. Joesoef et al. (1993) investigated the period of time from “child wish”
until conception in 2817 women. Regular users of cannabis became pregnant most quickly (mean
time = 3.7 months). Tobacco smokers needed an average of 5.1 months and drug-free women 4.3
months.
Grotenhermen and Leson (2001) reviewed the effects of cannabis and THC on other hormones. A single oral administration did not elevate plasma cortisol in man. However, smoking
two cannabis cigarettes caused a transient significant increase in plasma cortisol level (Cone
et al. 1986). Chronic heavy cannabis users did not show any significant differences in their
cortisol levels. Cannabis does not alter thyroid function in regular users (Bonnet et al. 2012).
It does not result in measurable changes in blood glucose level, but may influence glucose
tolerance (Permutt et al. 1976). However, relatively high doses are needed. In a clinical study
cannabis influenced blood levels of appetite hormones in people with HIV (Riggs et al. 2011).
Compared to placebo, cannabis administration was associated with significant increases in
plasma levels of ghrelin and leptin, and decreases in peptide YY, but did not significantly influence insulin levels.
According to a study with 10,896 citizens, a nationally representative sample of the US population, cannabis users had a significantly lower risk of developing both types of diabetes mellitus
compared to nonusers (adjusted OR: 0.36) (Rajavashisth et al. 2012).

38.9 Pregnancy and fetal development
The endocannabinoid system plays a crucial role in pregnancy. Successful pregnancy implantation and progression seem to require low levels of anandamide (Habayeb et al. 2004). At term,
anandamide levels dramatically increase during labor and are affected by the duration of labor,
which may explain a sometimes observed shorter gestation in cannabis users. In a large study with
3234 healthy pregnant women, of whom 4.9% had a preterm birth, cannabis use was associated
with a slightly increased preterm birth risk (Dekker et al. 2012).
THC rapidly crosses the placenta and the time course of changes of THC levels in fetal blood
coincides well with that in the maternal blood, though fetal plasma concentrations are lower
than maternal levels in rats (Hutchings et al. 1989). It is unlikely that cannabis causes embryonic
or fetal malformations and there are inconsistent epidemiological data on its effect on birth
weight. There is evidence of subtle disturbances of cerebral development resulting in cognitive
impairment in offspring of cannabis users from two longitudinal studies conducted in Canada
and the US (Fried et al. 2003; Richardson et al. 2002). This impairment might not be observed
before preschool or school age (see Box 38.1). In 13- to 16-year-old adolescents the strongest
relationship between prenatal maternal cigarette smoking and cognitive variables was seen with
overall intelligence and aspects of auditory functioning whereas prenatal exposure to cannabis
was negatively associated with tasks that required visual memory, analysis, and integration

679

680

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

(Fried et al. 2003). School achievement at age of 14 was lower in adolescents who were exposed
to cannabis during pregnancy (Goldschmidt et al. 2011). Similar to prenatal tobacco exposure,
cannabis exposure was associated with deficits in visual–motor coordination at the age of 16
(Willford et al. 2010).

38.10 Immune system
It has been demonstrated that THC may cause a shift in the development of type 1 and 2 T-helper
cells (Th1 and Th2) (see Box 38.1). THC treatment of cell cultures (Klein et al. 1998) and the use
of cannabis (Pacifici et al. 2003) was associated with a decrease of proinflammatory Th1 cytokines,
such as IFN-γ and (interleukin 2 (IL-2), and an increase in anti-inflammatory Th2 cytokines, such
as IL-4 and IL-10. In clinical studies no such changes were observed (Katona et al. 2005), which
may be due to the use of lower doses. These effects on the immune system may be beneficial in
inflammatory diseases such as Crohn’s disease and multiple sclerosis, but may have a negative
impact in immunocompromised subjects such as AIDS and cancer patients. Studies investigating
the effects of cannabis or THC on the course of AIDS have yielded conflicting results. In a prospective study by Kaslow et al. (1989) the use of cannabis in HIV-infected persons was not associated with the onset of AIDS. Di Franco et al. (1996) also failed to detect any association between
cannabis use and AIDS onset in HIV infected men in a 6-year epidemiological study. On the other
hand, Tindall et al. (1988) and Whitfield et al. (1997) did obtain evidence for such an association.
No effect of cannabis use on subpopulations of T lymphocytes in men with HIV were observed
in a longitudinal study (Chao et al. 2008). This observation was confirmed in rhesus monkeys
infected with SIV, the HIV equivalent in monkeys, who received different THC doses without
adversely affecting viral load or other markers of disease progression during the early stages of
infection (Winsauer et al. 2011). It may be possible that CB2 receptor agonists (Costantino et al.
2012) and THC (Molina et al. 2010) inhibit the replication of the HI-virus.
The use of cannabis was not associated with the natural course of cervical human papillomavirus and cervical cancer in HIV positive and HIV negative women in a large epidemiological study
(D’Souza et al. 2010).

38.11 Other organ systems
38.11.1 Liver

Daily cannabis use was a risk factor for progression of fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C in two small
epidemiological studies (Hézode et al. 2005; Ishida et al. 2008), while occasional use was not
(Hézode et al. 2005). Daily cannabis use was also associated with an increased risk of fatty liver in
patients with hepatitis C (Hézode et al. 2008). However, a link between cannabis use and progression to liver fibrosis or cirrhosis could not be confirmed in a large longitudinal study (Brunet et al.
2013). Cannabis use improved retention and virological outcomes in patients treated for hepatitis
C with interferon and ribavirin (Sylvestre et al. 2006; Costiniuk et al. 2008).
38.11.2 Ophthalmic effects

The use of cannabis may disturb accommodation, and the pupil’s reaction to light is slowed.
High doses of cannabis may increase eye pupil size (Merzouki et al. 2008). Tear flow is decreased
(Hollister 1986). Decreased tear flow may potentially increase the risk of infections of the eye
(keratitis, conjunctivitis). Regular cannabis use was shown to decrease eye blink rates in a dosedependent manner (Kowal et al. 2011).

Nonpsychological Adverse Effects

38.11.3 Effects on the skin

Activation of the CB1 receptor reduces pigmentation of the skin induced by ultraviolet B radiation
(Magina et al. 2011).

38.12 Tolerance to physical effects
Humans can develop tolerance to cannabis-induced cardiovascular and autonomic changes,
decreased intraocular pressure, and changes in sleep, sleep electroencephalogram, and mood, and
to certain cannabis-induced behavioral changes (Jones et al. 1981). In a number of studies, Jones
and Benowitz (1976) orally administered daily THC doses of 210 mg to about 120 volunteers for
11–21 days. Participants developed tolerance to cognitive and psychomotor impairment and to
the psychological high by the end of these studies (Jones et al. 1976). After a few days an increased
heart rate was replaced by a normal or a slowed heart rate. Tolerance develops also to cannabinoidinduced orthostatic hypotension (Benowitz and Jones 1975). Speed and intensity of tolerance varies according to effect. In a short clinical study with subjects receiving high THC doses tolerance
developed quickly to subjective intoxication, but not to cardiovascular effects (Gorelick et al. 2012).
Clinical long-term studies with THC and cannabis in patients suffering from multiple sclerosis
(Zajicek et al. 2005), spasticity and pain (Maurer et al. 1990), and AIDS (Beal et al. 1997) did not
find tolerance to the medicinal effects of moderate doses (usually 5–30 mg THC daily) within
6–12 months.

38.13 Adverse effects of cannabidiol
CBD is nontoxic in nontransformed cells and does not induce changes in food intake, induce catalepsy, affect physiological parameters (heart rate, blood pressure, and body temperature), affect
gastrointestinal transit, or alter psychomotor or psychological functions (Bergamaschi et al. 2011).
It antagonizes several effects of CB1 receptor agonists, including increased appetite, reduced cognition, and psychological effects (Englund et al. 2012; Morgan et al. 2010; Scopinho et al. 2011).
CBD may cause increased wakefulness (Nicholson et al. 2004). According to animal research
(Chagas et al. 2013) and experiences of cannabis users (personal communications) CBD may also
improve sleep. Perhaps the use of different doses may explain these different sleep observations.

38.14 Harmful interactions of cannabinoids with other drugs
Because THC is metabolized mainly in the liver by cytochrome P-450 isoenzymes (principally
CYP2C9), it may interact with other medications metabolized in the same way (Grotenhermen
2005). Several phytocannabinoids (THC, CBN, CBD) reduce the degradation of warfarin and of
diclofenac increasing their effect and duration of action. This cannabinoid effect was due to the
inhibition of CYP2C9 in the liver (Yamaori et al. 2012). Cannabis smoking can reduce the plasma
concentration of individual antipsychotics (clozapine, olanzapine). However, neither in AIDS
patients nor in cancer patients were the plasma levels of various antiretroviral drugs or cytostatics
altered by simultaneous treatment with cannabinoids (Engels et al. 2007; Kosel et al. 2002).
Cannabinoids interact most often with substances that produce similar effects, leading to
mutual enhancement or attenuation of such effects (Hollister 1999). The principal clinically
relevant interactions are increased tiredness when cannabinoids are taken together with other
psychotropic agents (e.g., alcohol and benzodiazepines) or interactions with drugs that also act on
the cardiovascular system (such as amphetamines).

681

682

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

38.15 Risks of smoking
One of the greatest concerns about chronic effects of recreational cannabis use pertains to the inhalation of combustion products that may damage the mucous membranes, if the drug is smoked as a
cannabis cigarette (“joint”) or in a pipe (see Box 38.2). The cannabis plant contains more than 500
chemical compounds including amino acids, fatty acids, etc., which generally have a very low toxic
potential. Pyrolysis creates at least 200 thermal degradation products in smoke not found in cannabis, including mutagenic polycyclic hydrocarbons such as benz[α]anthracene, benzo[α]pyrene,
naphthalene, and several cresols and phenols. The composition of these combustion products is
at least qualitatively similar to that of tobacco smoke or that of the smoke generated from other
dried plant material, despite some minor differences (British Medical Association 1997). Thus, one
would expect similar damage to the mucosa by cannabis smoke as following the use of tobacco.
Indeed, signs of airway inflammation (vascular hyperplasia, submucosal edema, inflammatory cell
infiltrates, and goblet cell hyperplasia) were found in bronchial biopsies of cannabis smokers, all
changes similar to those seen in tobacco smokers (Roth et al. 1998). Regular cannabis smoking in
young adults was associated with wheezing, shortness of breath during exercise, and the production of sputum as it is in tobacco smokers (Taylor et al. 2000). Smoking of cannabis increases the
risk of chronic bronchitis (Tashkin et al. 2012). However, in a long-term epidemiological study
with 5115 men and women cannabis smoking did not reduce lung function and did not increase
the risk for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (Pletcher et al. 2012). Some case studies reported an increased risk of the development of lung emphysema and spontaneous pneumothorax in young cannabis smokers (Beshay et al. 2007; Hii et al. 2008; Jakab et al. 2012).
Biopsies from cannabis smokers have also revealed a higher rate of precancerous pathological
changes compared to nonsmokers (Barsky et al. 1998; Fligiel et al. 1997), which is suggestive of
an increased risk of cancer in the respiratory tract or elsewhere. So far, the epidemiological data
are inconclusive. A review of two cohort studies and 14 case–control studies by the International
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) did not find a clear association between cannabis use and
cancer (Hashibe et al. 2005). Authors noted that sufficient studies are not available to adequately
evaluate whether cannabis smoking significantly increases the risk of developing cancer, and published studies often have limitations including too few heavy cannabis users in the study samples
(see Box 38.2). The largest epidemiological study conducted so far with 1212 incident cancer cases
and 1040 cancer-free controls did not find a positive association between cannabis smoking and
the investigated cancer types (mouth, larynx, lung, pharynx) (Hashibe et al. 2006). There was no
dose–effect relationship and even heavy use was not associated with an increased risk, which may
be due to inhibition of tumor growth by THC observed in vivo (Preet et al. 2008).

Box 38.2 Risks of cannabis smoking
◆

Vascular hyperplasia, submucosal edema, inflammatory cell infiltrates, goblet cell hyperplasia, and precancerous pathological changes in bronchial biopsies of cannabis smokers.

◆

Chronic bronchitis.

◆

No reduction in lung function or COPD.

◆

Case reports of lung emphysema and spontaneous pneumothorax.

◆

No clear association between cannabis smoking and cancer.

Nonpsychological Adverse Effects

38.16 Harms of prohibition
Cannabis is the world’s most widely produced and used illicit substance: it is grown in almost all
countries of the world, and is smoked by 130–190 million people at least once a year (press release
by UNODC of June 23, 2010).
The prohibition of cannabis use may harm both cannabis users and society as a whole (see Box
38.3). In contrast to other social activities that may be harmful to the individual and/or society,
the use of cannabis remains illegal in most countries. Advocates of cannabis prohibition believe
that it reduces trafficking and use, thereby improving productivity and health. Critics believe that
prohibition curbs trafficking and use only modestly while causing several negative side effects,
such that the well-known harms of prohibition enhance the toxicity from consumption of the
drug itself. In 2007, the Commission on Illegal Drugs, Communities and Public Policy of the UK
Action and Research Centre (RSA) stated in a report: “The current law is out of date, unwieldy
and peppered with anomalies, an agglomeration of miscellaneous provisions adopted to address
situations that in many cases no longer apply. It causes some social harm while limiting others.
It acknowledges no parallels and no relationships between the use of illegal drugs and the use of
alcohol and tobacco” (RSA Commission on Illegal Drugs 2007, p. 284).
Cannabis prohibition may cause several undesirable social and health effects. They include an
insufficient access to its medicinal benefits, the loss of the driver’s license, the need for cannabis
users to interact with a criminal milieu, and an erosion of the credibility of governments that
created laws considered by many to be unjust and unenforceable. Cannabis prohibition also may
have disrupted small-scale outdoor production, driven commercial growers indoors, and likely
contributed to the observed increase in the potency of illegal cannabis, as its producers tried to
maximize profits and minimize their risks (Hall and Degenhardt 2006).
These and other consequences of cannabis prohibition, such as the need to build and maintain a
growing criminal system, including courts and prisons, also generate considerable costs to society.
Based on a report on the economics of cannabis prohibition, the late Nobel Prize winning economist Milton Friedman and more than 500 of his colleagues released an open letter to President Bush
calling for “an open and honest debate about marijuana prohibition.” They added, “We believe such

Box 38.3 Harms of prohibition
◆

Insufficient access to its medicinal benefits.

◆

Poisoning with adulterants of illegal products.

◆

Use of more dangerous synthetic cannabinoids.

◆

A criminal record for otherwise law-abiding young adults, which may have negative effects
on their job-related future.

◆

The need for cannabis users to interact with a criminal milieu.

◆

Erosion of the credibility of governments that created laws considered by many to be unjust.

◆

Increase in the potency of illegal cannabis.

◆

Creation of a reason for building and maintaining a growing criminal system.

◆

Considerable financial costs to society.

◆

Encouragement of organized crime.

683

684

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

a debate will favour a regime in which marijuana is legal but taxed and regulated like other goods”
(Miron 2005). It is estimated that the Netherlands earns 400 million Euros annually in tax revenues
from the sales of cannabis in coffee shops (NIS News Bulletin 2008). According to a report by the
Cato Institute, US, legalizing cannabis would save the US altogether 8.7 billion dollars per year
as a result of both a reduction in government expenditure on enforcement of prohibition and an
increase in tax income (Miron and Waldock 2010). Currently the profits from drug trafficking only
benefit the traffickers and are often used to finance criminal activities, including acts of terrorism.
There is no agreement among scientists on how decriminalization or legalization of cannabis would affect key parameters, such as the prevalence of cannabis use by adults and adolescents, price trends, and the extent of unregulated home production. Effects will vary between
countries and their sociocultural settings. Decriminalization and legalization would certainly
increase availability of cannabis and there is great concern that this will also increase use (Joffe
et al. 2004), but available data do not support this concern (van den Brink 2008). According to
a study by the World Health Organization, which describes data from 17 countries participating in the World Mental Health Survey Initiative of the World Health Organization, “drug use
is not distributed evenly and is not simply related to drug policy, since countries with stringent
user-level illegal drug policies did not have lower levels of use than countries with liberal ones”
(Degenhardt et al. 2008). Laws that legalized the medical use of cannabis in several US states did
not increase use in adolescents (Harper et al. 2012). A representative survey of 15,191 adolescents aged 15–24 years from different European countries concluded that the legal status had no
effect on drug use (Vuolo et al. 2013).
Instead, several studies found that social background, emotional, and other psycho-social factors were more reliable predictors of cannabis use and generally problematic drug use than the
availability of the drug or its legal status.

References
Anderson, D.M. and Rees D.I. (2011). Medical Marijuana Laws, Traffic Fatalities, and Alcohol
Consumption. IZA, Discussion Paper No. 6112. Available at: http://ftp.iza.org/dp6112.pdf.
Asbridge, M., Hayden, J.A., and Cartwright, J.L. (2012). Acute cannabis consumption and motor vehicle
collision risk: systematic review of observational studies and meta-analysis. BMJ, 344, 536.
Barsky, S.H., Roth, M.D., Kleerup, E.C., Simmons, M., and Tashkin, D.P. (1998). Histopathologic and
molecular alterations in bronchial epithelium in habitual smokers of marijuana, cocaine, and/or tobacco. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 90, 1198–1205.
Bátkai, S., Rajesh, M., Mukhopadhyay, P., et al. (2007). Decreased age-related cardiac dysfunction, myocardial nitrative stress, inflammatory gene expression, and apoptosis in mice lacking fatty acid amide
hydrolase. American Journal of Physiology. Heart and Circulatory Physiology, 293, 909–918.
Beal, J.E., Olson, R., Lefkowitz, L., et al. (1997). Long-term efficacy and safety of dronabinol for acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome-associated anorexia. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 14, 7–14.
Bédard, M., Dubois, S., and Weaver, B. (2007). The impact of cannabis on driving. Canadian Journal of
Public Health. Revue Canadienne de Sante Publique, 98, 6–11.
Benowitz, N.L. and Jones, R.T. (1975). Cardiovascular effects of prolonged delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
ingestion. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 18, 287–297.
Bergamaschi, M.M., Queiroz, R.H., Zuardi, A.W., and Crippa, J.A. (2011). Safety and side effects of cannabidiol, a Cannabis sativa constituent. Current Drug Safety, 6, 237–249.
Beshay, M., Kaiser, H., Niedhart, D., Reymond, M.A., and Schmid, R.A. (2007). Emphysema and secondary pneumothorax in young adults smoking cannabis. European Journal of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, 32,
834–838.

Nonpsychological Adverse Effects

Bonnet, U. (2013). Chronic cannabis abuse, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and thyroid function.
Pharmacopsychiatry, 46, 35–36.
Bowman, M. and Phil, R.O. (1973). Cannabis: psychological effects of chronic heavy use. A controlled study
of intellectual functioning in chronic users of high potency cannabis. Psychopharmacologia, 29, 159–170.
British Medical Association. (1997). Therapeutic Uses of Cannabis. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Brunet, L., Moodie, E.E.M., Rollet, K., et al. for the Canadian Co-infection Cohort Investigators (2013).
Marijuana smoking does not accelerate progression of liver disease in HIV-hepatitis C coinfection:
a longitudinal cohort analysis. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 57, 663–670.
Calabria, B., Degenhardt, L., Hall, W., and Lynskey, M. (2010). Does cannabis use increase the risk of
death? Systematic review of epidemiological evidence on adverse effects of cannabis use. Drug and
Alcohol Review, 29, 318–330.
Campos, A.C., Ferreira, F.R., da Silva, W.A. Jr., and Guimarães, F.S. (2013). Predator threat stress promotes long lasting anxiety-like behaviors and modulates synaptophysin and CB1 receptors expression in
brain areas associated with PTSD symptoms. Neuroscience Letter, 533, 34–38.
Carlin, A.S., Bakker, C.B., Halpern, L., and Post, R.D. (1972). Social facilitation of marijuana intoxication:
impact of social set and pharmacological activity. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 80, 132–140.
Chagas, M.H., Crippa, J.A., Zuardi A.W., et al. (2013). Effects of acute systemic administration of cannabidiol on sleep-wake cycle in rats. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 27, 312–316.
Chait, L.D. and Pierri, J. (1989). Some physical characteristics of NIDA marijuana cigarettes. Addictive
Behaviors, 14, 61–67.
Chan, P.C., Sills, R.C., Braun, A.G., Haseman, J.K., and Bucher, J.R. (1996). Toxicity and carcinogenicity
of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in Fischer rats and B6C3F1 mice. Fundamental and Applied Toxicology,
30, 109–117.
Chao, C., Jacobson, L.P., Tashkin, D., et al. (2008). Recreational drug use and T lymphocyte subpopulations in HIV-uninfected and HIV-infected men. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 94, 165–171.
Chopra, G.S. and Jandu, B.S. (1976). Psychoclinical effects of long-term marijuana use in 275 Indian
chronic users. A comparative assessment of effects in Indian and USA users. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 282, 95–108.
Clark, S.C., Greene, C., Karr, G.W., Maccannell, K.L., and Milstein, S.L. (1974). Cardiovascular effects
of marihuana in man. Canadian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology. Revue Canadienne de Sante
Publique, 52, 706–719.
Cone, E.J., Johnson, R.E., Moore, J.D., and Roache, J.D. (1986). Acute effects of smoking marijuana on
hormones, subjective effects and performance in male human subjects. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and
Behavior, 24, 1749–1754.
Costantino, C,M., Gupta, A., Yewdall, A.W., Dale, B.M., Devi, L.A., and Chen, B.K. (2012). Cannabinoid receptor 2-mediated attenuation of CXCR4-tropic HIV infection in primary CD4+ T cells. PLoS One, 7, e33961.
Costiniuk, C.T., Mills, E., and Cooper, C.L. (2008). Evaluation of oral cannabinoid-containing medications for the management of interferon and ribavirin-induced anorexia, nausea and weight loss in
patients treated for chronic hepatitis C virus. Canadian Journal of Gastroenterology. Journal Canadien de
Gastroenterologie, 22, 376–380.
D’Souza, G., Palefsky, J.M., Zhong, Y., et al. (2010). Marijuana use is not associated with cervical human
papillomavirus natural history or cervical neoplasia in HIV-seropositive or HIV-seronegative women.
Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention, 19, 869–872.
Dekker, G.A., Lee, S.Y., North, R.A., McCowan, L.M., Simpson, N.A., and Roberts, C.T. (2012). Risk factors for preterm birth in an international prospective cohort of nulliparous women. PLoS One, 7, e39154.
Degenhardt, L., Chiu, W.T., Sampson, N., et al. (2008). Toward a global view of alcohol, tobacco, cannabis,
and cocaine use: findings from the WHO World Mental Health Surveys. PLoS Medicine, 5, 141.
Deusch, E., Kress, H.G., Kraft, B., and Kozek-Langenecker, S.A. (2004). The procoagulatory effects of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in human platelets. Anesthesia and Analgesia, 99, 1127–1130.

685

686

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Di Franco, M.J., Shephard, H.W, Hunter, D.J., Tosteson, T.D., and Ascher, M.S. (1996). The lack of association of marijuana and other recreational drugs with progression to AIDS in the San Francisco Men’s
Health Study. Annals of Epidemiology, 6, 283–289.
Ditmyer, M., Demopoulos, C., McClain, M., Dounis, G., and Mobley, C. (2013). The effect of tobacco and
marijuana use on dental health status in Nevada adolescents: a trend analysis. The Journal of Adolescent
Health, 52, 641–648.
Drummer, O.H., Gerostamoulos, J. and Batziris, H., et al. (2004). The involvement of drugs in drivers of
motor vehicles killed in Australian road traffic crashes. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 36, 239–248.
Engels, F.K., de Jong, F.A., Sparreboom, A., et al. (2007). Medicinal cannabis does not influence the clinical pharmacokinetics of irinotecan and docetaxel. The Oncologist, 12, 291–300.
Englund, A., Morrison, P.D., Nottage, J., et al. (2013). Cannabidiol inhibits THC-elicited paranoid symptoms and hippocampal-dependent memory impairment. Journal of Psychopharmacology (Oxford), 27,
19–27.
Esfandyari, T., Camilleri, M., Busciglio, I., Burton, D., Baxter, K., and Zinsmeister, A.R. (2007). Effects
of a cannabinoid receptor agonist on colonic motor and sensory functions in humans: a randomized,
placebo-controlled study. American Journal of Physiology. Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 293,
137–145.
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction. (2006). Annual Report 2006. Available at:
http://ar2006.emcdda.europa.eu/en/home-en.html.
Fligiel, S.E., Roth, M.D., Kleerup, E.C., Barsky, S.H., Simmons, M.S., and Tashkin, D.P. (1997).
Tracheobronchial histopathology in habitual smokers of cocaine, marijuana, and/or tobacco. Chest, 112,
319–326.
Fried, P.A., Watkinson, B., and Gray, R. (2003). Differential effects on cognitive functioning in 13- to
16-year-olds prenatally exposed to cigarettes and marihuana. Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 25,
427–436.
Frost, L., Mostofsky, E., Rosenbloom, J.I., Mukamal, K.J., and Mittleman, M.A. (2013). Marijuana use
and long-term mortality among survivors of acute myocardial infarction. American Heart Journal, 165,
170–175.
Gerberich, S.G., Sidney, S., Braun, B.L., Tekawa, I.S., Tolan, K.K., and Quesenberry, C.P. (2003).
Marijuana use and injury events resulting in hospitalization. Annals of Epidemiology, 13, 230–237.
Goldschmidt, L., Richardson, G.A., Willford, J.A., Severtson, S.G., and Day, N.L. (2012). School achievement in 14-year-old youths prenatally exposed to marijuana. Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 34,
161–167.
Gorelick, D.A., Goodwin, R.S., Schwilke, E., et al. (2013). Tolerance to effects of high-dose oral
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol and plasma cannabinoid concentrations in male daily cannabis smokers.
Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 37, 11–16.
Gorman, D.M. and Charles Huber Jr., J. (2007). Do medical cannabis laws encourage cannabis use? The
International Journal on Drug Policy, 18, 160–167.
Grotenhermen, F. (2005). Cannabinoids. Current Drug Targets. CNS and Neurological Disorders, 4, 507–530.
Grotenhermen, F. (2010). Cannabis-associated arteritis. Vasa, 39, 43–53.
Grotenhermen, F., Leson, G. and Pless, P. (2001). Assessment of Exposure to and Human Health Risk from
THC and Other Cannabinoids in Hemp Foods. Berkeley, CA: Leson Environmental Consulting.
Habayeb, O.M., Taylor, A.H., Evans, M.D., et al. (2004). Plasma levels of the endocannabinoid anandamide in women – a potential role in pregnancy maintenance and labor? The Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 89, 5482–5487.
Hall, W. and Degenhardt, L. (2006). What are the policy implications of the evidence on cannabis and psychosis? Canadian Journal of Psychiatry. Revue Canadienne de Psychiatrie, 51, 566–574.
Harding, I.H., Solowij, N., Harrison, B.J., et al. (2012). Functional connectivity in brain networks underlying cognitive control in chronic cannabis users. Neuropsychopharmacology, 37, 1923–1933.

Nonpsychological Adverse Effects

Hart, C.L., van Gorp, W., Haney, M., Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M. W. (2001). Effects of acute smoked
marijuana on complex cognitive performance. Neuropsychopharmacology, 25, 757–765.
Hashibe, M., Morgenstern, H., Cui, Y., et al. (2006). Marijuana use and the risk of lung and upper aerodigestive tract cancers: results of a population-based case-control study. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers
& Prevention, 15, 1829–1834.
Hashibe, M., Straif, K., Tashkin, D.P., Morgenstern, H., Greenland, S., and Zhang, Z.F. (2005).
Epidemiologic review of marijuana use and cancer risk. Alcohol, 35, 265–275.
Heitland, I., Klumpers, F., Oosting, R.S., Evers, D.J., Leon Kenemans, J., and Baas, J.M. (2012). Failure to
extinguish fear and genetic variability in the human cannabinoid receptor 1. Translational Psychiatry, 2,
162.
Hembree, W.C., Nahas, G.G., Zeidenberg, P., and Huang, H.F. (1978). Changes in human spermatozoa
associated with high dose marihuana smoking. Advances in the Biosciences, 22, 429–439.
Hézode, C., Roudot-Thoraval, F., Nguyen, S., et al. (2005). Daily cannabis smoking as a risk factor for progression of fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology (Baltimore, Md.), 42, 63–71.
Hézode, C., Zafrani, E.S., Roudot-Thoraval, F., et al. (2008). Daily cannabis use: a novel risk factor of steatosis severity in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Gastroenterology, 134, 432–439.
Hii, S.W., Tam, J.D., Thompson, B.R., and Naughton, M.T. (2008). Bullous lung disease due to marijuana.
Respirology, 13, 122–127.
Hollister, L.E. (1986). Health aspects of cannabis. Pharmacological Reviews, 38, 1–20.
Hollister, L.E. (1999). Interactions of marihuana and 9-THC with other drugs. In: G. Nahas, K.M. Sutin,
D.J. Harvey, and S. Agurell (eds.). Marihuana and Medicine. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, pp. 273–277.
Hoyer, F.F., Steinmetz, M., Zimmer, S., et al. (2011). Atheroprotection via cannabinoid receptor-2 is
mediated by circulating and vascular cells in vivo. Journal of Molecular and Cellular Cardiology, 51,
1007–1014.
Hutchings, D.E., Martin, B.R., Gamagaris, Z., Miller, N., and Fico, T. (1989). Plasma concentrations of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in dams and fetuses following acute or multiple prenatal dosing in rats.
Life Sciences, 44, 697–701.
Ishida, J.H., Peters, M.G., Jin, C., et al. (2008). Influence of cannabis use on severity of hepatitis C disease.
Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 6, 69–75.
Jakab, L., Szántó, Z., Benkő, I., Szalai, Z., Pótó, L., and Molnár, F.T. (2012). [On the ethiogenesis of spontaneus primary pneumothorax. Marijuana: a cause or blame?]. Magyar Sebészet, 65, 421–425.
Joesoef, M.R., Beral, V., Aral, S.O., Rolfs, R.T., and Cramer, D.W. (1993). Fertility and use of cigarettes,
alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine. Annals of Epidemiology, 3, 592–594.
Joffe, A., Yancy, S., and the Committee on Substance Abuse and Committee on Adolescence. (2004).
Legalization of marijuana: potential impact on youth. Pediatrics, 113, 632–638.
Jones, R.K., Shinar, D., and Walsh, J.M. (2003). State of Knowledge of Drug Impaired Driving.. Final report,
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Report DOT HS 809 642 Washington, DC: National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
Jones, R.T. and Benowitz, N. (1976). The 30-day trip – clinical studies of cannabis tolerance and dependence. In:
M.C. Braude, S. Szara (eds.). The Pharmacology of Marihuana. Vol. 2. New York: Raven Press, pp. 627–642.
Jones, R.T. and Stone, G.C. (1970). Psychological studies of marijuana and alcohol in man.
Psychopharmacologia, 18, 108–117.
Jones, R.T., Benowitz, N., and Bachman, J. (1976). Clinical studies of cannabis tolerance and dependence.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 282, 221–239.
Jones, R.T., Benowitz, N., and Herning, R.I. (1981). Clinical relevance of cannabis tolerance and dependence. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 143–152.
Jukic, A.M., Weinberg, C.R., Baird, D.D., and Wilcox, A.J. (2007). Lifestyle and reproductive factors associated with follicular phase length. Journal of Women’s Health (2002), 16, 1340–1347.

687

688

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Julien, R.M. (1998). A Primer of Drug Action, New York: W.H. Freeman and Company.
Katona, S., Kaminski, E., Sanders, H., and Zajicek, J. (2005). Cannabinoid influence on cytokine profile in
multiple sclerosis. Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 140, 580–585.
Klein, T.W., Newton, C., and Friedman, H. (1998). Cannabinoid receptors and the cytokine network.
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology, 437, 215–222.
Kopach, O., Vats, J., Netsyk, O., Voitenko, N., Irving, A., and Fedirko, N. (2012). Cannabinoid receptors
in submandibular acinar cells: functional coupling between saliva fluid and electrolytes secretion and
Ca2+ signalling. Journal of Cell Science, 125, 1884–1895.
Kosel, B.W., Aweeka, F.T., Benowitz, N.L., et al. (2002). The effects of cannabinoids on the pharmacokinetics of indinavir and nelfinavir. AIDS, 16, 543–550.
Kowal, M.A., Colzato, L.S., and Hommel, B. (2011). Decreased spontaneous eye blink rates in chronic cannabis users: evidence for striatal cannabinoid-dopamine interactions. PLoS One, 6, e26662.
Laumon, B., Gadegbeku, B., Martin, J.L., and Biecheler, M.B. (2005). Cannabis intoxication and fatal road
crashes in France: population based case-control study. British Medical Journal, 331, 1371.
Leweke, F.M., Kampmann, C., Radwan, M., et al. (1998). The effects of tetrahydrocannabinol on
the recognition of emotionally charged words: an analysis using event-related brain potentials.
Neuropsychobiology, 37, 104–111.
Leweke, F.M., Schneider, U., Thies, M., Münte, T.F., and Emrich, H.M. (1999). Effects of synthetic
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on binocular depth inversion of natural and artificial objects in man.
Psychopharmacology, 142, 230–235.
Magina, S., Esteves-Pinto, C., Moura, E., et al. (2011). Inhibition of basal and ultraviolet B-induced melanogenesis by cannabinoid CB1 receptors: a keratinocyte-dependent effect. Archives of Dermatological
Research, 303, 201–210.
Maurer, M., Henn, V., Dittrich, A., and Hofmann, A. (1990). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol shows antispastic and analgesic effects in a single case double-blind trial. European Archives of Psychiatry and
Clinical Neuroscience, 240, 1–4.
Mendelson, J.H., Mello, N.K., and Ellingboe, J. (1985). Acute effects of marihuana smoking on prolactin levels in human females. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 232,
220–222.
Merzouki, A., Molero Mesa, J., Louktibi, A., Kadiri, M., and Urbano, G.V. (2008). Assessing changes in
pupillary size in Rifian smokers of kif (Cannabis sativa L.). Journal of Forensic and Legal Medicine, 15,
335–338.
Miron, J.A. (2005). The Budgetary Implications of Marijuana Prohibition. Available at: http://www.prohibitioncosts.org.
Miron, J.A. and Waldock, K. (2010). The Budgetary Impact of Ending Drug Prohibition. Washington DC:
Cato Institute. Available at: http://www.cato.org/publications/white-paper/budgetary-impact-endingdrug-prohibition.
Mittleman, M.A., Lewis, R.A., Maclure, M., Sherwood, J.B., and Muller, J.E. (2001). Triggering myocardial infarction by marijuana. Circulation, 103, 2805–2809.
Molina, P.E., Winsauer, P., Zhang, P., et al. (2011). Cannabinoid administration attenuates the progression of simian immunodeficiency virus. AIDS Research and Human Retroviruses, 27, 585–592.
Morgan, C.J., Freeman, T.P., Schafer, G.L., and Curran, H.V. (2010). Cannabidiol attenuates the
appetitive effects of Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in humans smoking their chosen cannabis.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 35, 1879–1885.
Mueller, B.A., Daling, J.R., Weiss, N.S. and Moore, D.E. (1990). Recreational drug use and the risk of primary infertility. Epidemiology, 1, 195–200.
Nawrot, T.S., Perez, L., Künzli, N., Munters, E., and Nemery, B. (2011). Public health importance of triggers of myocardial infarction: a comparative risk assessment. Lancet, 377, 732–740.

Nonpsychological Adverse Effects

Nicholson, A.N., Turner, C., Stone, B.M., and Robson, P.J. (2004). Effect of Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
and cannabidiol on nocturnal sleep and early-morning behavior in young adults. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 24, 305–313.
NIS News Bulletin. (2008). State Earns 400 Million Euros a Year from Cannabis Bars. May 3. Available at:
http://www.nisnews.nl.
Nutt, D.J., King, L.A., and Phillips, L.D. (2010). Independent Scientific Committee on Drugs. Drug harms
in the UK: a multicriteria decision analysis. Lancet, 376, 1558–1565.
Pacifici, R., Zuccaro, P., Pichini, S., et al. (2003). Modulation of the immune system in cannabis users.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 289, 1929–1931.
Percie du Sert, N., Ho, W.S., Rudd, J.A., Andrews, P.L. (2010). Cannabinoid-induced reduction in antral
pacemaker frequency: a telemetric study in the ferret. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 22,
1257–1266.
Permutt, M.A., Goodwin, D.W., Schwin, R., and Hill, S.Y. (1976). The effect of marijuana on carbohydrate metabolism. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 133, 220–224.
Pletcher, M.J., Vittinghoff, E., Kalhan, R., et al. (2012). Association between marijuana exposure and pulmonary function over 20 years. Journal of the American Medical Association, 307, 173–181.
Preet, A., Ganju, R.K., and Groopman, J.E. (2008). Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol inhibits epithelial growth
factor-induced lung cancer cell migration in vitro as well as its growth and metastasis in vivo. Oncogene,
10, 339–346.
Prestifilippo, J.P., Fernandez-Solari, J., de la Cal, C., et al. (2006). Inhibition of salivary secretion by activation of cannabinoid receptors. Experimental Biology and Medicine (Maywood, N.J.), 231, 1421–1429.
Rajavashisth, T.B., Shaheen, M., and Norris, K.C., et al. (2012). Decreased prevalence of diabetes in
marijuana users: cross-sectional data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES) III. BMJ Open, 2, 494.
Richardson, G.A., Ryan, C., Willford, J., Day, N.L., and Goldschmidt, L. (2002). Prenatal alcohol
and marijuana exposure: effects on neuropsychological outcomes at 10 years. Neurotoxicology and
Teratology, 24, 309–320.
Riggs, P.K., Vaida, F., Rossi, S.S., et al. (2012). A pilot study of the effects of cannabis on appetite hormones in HIV-infected adult men. Brain Research, 1431, 46–52.
Rodondi, N., Pletcher, M.J., Liu, K., Hulley, S.B., and Sidney, S. (2006). Marijuana use, diet, body mass
index, and cardiovascular risk factors (from the CARDIA study). The American Journal of Cardiology,
98, 478–484.
Roth, M.D., Arora, A., Barsky, S.H., Kleerup, E.C., Simmons, M., and Tashkin, D.P. (1998). Airway
inflammation in young marijuana and tobacco smokers. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical
Care Medicine, 157, 928–937.
RSA Commission on Illegal Drugs, Communities and Public Policy (2007). Drugs – Facing Facts.
Available at: http://www.rsadrugscommission.org/.
Schulz-Katterbach, M., Imfeld, T., and Imfeld, C. (2009). Cannabis and caries – does regular cannabis
use increase the risk of caries in cigarette smokers? Schweizer Monatsschrift für Zahnmedizin = Revue
Mensuelle Suisse d’odonto-stomatologie = Rivista Mensile Svizzera di Odontologia e Stomatologia/SSO,
119, 576–583.
Scopinho, A.A., Guimarães, F.S., Corrêa, F.M., and Resstel, L.B. (2011). Cannabidiol inhibits the hyperphagia induced by cannabinoid-1 or serotonin-1A receptor agonists. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and
Behavior, 98, 268–272.
Sewell, R.A., Schnakenberg, A., Elander, J., et al. (2013). Acute effects of THC on time perception in frequent and infrequent cannabis users. Psychopharmacology, 226, 401–413.
Simonetto, D.A., Oxentenko, A.S., Herman, M.L., and Szostek, J.H. (2012). Cannabinoid hyperemesis: a
case series of 98 patients. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 87, 114–119.

689

690

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Smiley, A.M. (1999). Marijuana: on road and driving simulator studies. In: H. Kalant, W. Corrigal, W. Hall,
and R. Smart (eds.). The Health Effects of Cannabis. Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation,
pp. 173–191.
Steffens, S., Veillard, N.R., Arnaud, C., et al. (2005). Low dose oral cannabinoid therapy reduces progression of atherosclerosis in mice. Nature, 434, 782–786.
Sylvestre, D.L., Clements, B.J., and Malibu, Y. (2006). Cannabis use improves retention and virological
outcomes in patients treated for hepatitis C. European Journal of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, 18,
1057–1063.
Tashkin, D.P., Simmons, M.S., and Tseng, C.H. (2012). Impact of changes in regular use of marijuana
and/or tobacco on chronic bronchitis. Journal of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, 9, 367–374.
Taylor, D.R., Poulton, R., Moffitt, T.E., Ramankutty, P., and Sears, M.R., (2000). The respiratory effects
of cannabis dependence in young adults. Addiction, 95, 1669–1677.
Thomas, H. (1993). Psychiatric symptoms in cannabis users. British Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 141–149.
Thompson, G.R., Rosenkrantz, H., Schaeppi, U.H., and Braude, M.C. (1973). Comparison of acute oral
toxicity of cannabinoids in rats, dogs and monkeys. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 25, 363–372.
Thomson, W.M., Poulton, R., Broadbent, J.M., et al. (2008). Cannabis smoking and periodontal disease
among young adults. JAMA, 299, 525–531.
Tindall, B., Philpot, C.R., Cooper, D.A., et al. (1988). The Sydney AIDS Project: development of acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome in a group of HIV seropositive homosexual men. Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Medicine, 18, 8–15.
Tunbridge, R., Clark, A., Ward, B.N., Dye, L., and Berghaus, G. (2000). Prioritising Drugs and Medicines
for Development of Roadside Impairment Testing. Project Deliverable DR1, CERTIFIED EU Research
Project (Contract No RO-98-3054). Leeds: School of Psychology, University of Leeds.
Van den Brink, W. (2008). Forum: decriminalization of cannabis. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 21,
122–126.
Van Laere, K., Casteels, C and Dhollander, I., et al. (2010). Widespread decrease of type 1 cannabinoid
receptor availability in Huntington disease in vivo. Journal of Nuclear Medicine: Official Publication,
Society of Nuclear Medicine, 51, 1413–1417.
Vinson, D. (2006). Marijuana and other illicit drug use and the risk of injury: A case-control study. Missouri
Medicine, 103, 152–156.
Vivas, A.B., Estevez, A.F., Moreno, M., Panagis, G. and Flores, P. (2012). Use of cannabis enhances attentional inhibition. Human Psychopharmacology, 27, 464–469.
Vuolo, M. (2013). National-level drug policy and young people’s illicit drug use: a multilevel analysis of the
European Union. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 131, 149–156.
Wade, D.T., Makela, P., Robson, P., House, H. and Bateman C. (2004). Do cannabis-based medicinal
extracts have general or specific effects on symptoms in multiple sclerosis? A double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled study on 160 patients. Multiple Sclerosis Journal, 10, 434–441.
Wetherell, M.A., Atherton, K., Grainger, J., Brosnan, R. and Scholey, A.B. (2012). The effects of multitasking on psychological stress reactivity in recreational users of cannabis and MDMA. Human
Psychopharmacology, 27, 167–176.
Whitfield, R.M., Bechtel, L.M. and Starich, G.H. (1997). The impact of ethanol and Marinol/marijuana
usage on HIV+/AIDS patients undergoing azidothymidine, azidothymidine/dideoxycytidine, or dideoxyinosine therapy. Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research, 21, 122–127.
Willecke, F., Zeschky, K. and Ortiz Rodriguez, A., et al. (2011). Cannabinoid receptor 2 signaling does not
modulate atherogenesis in mice. PLoS One, 6, 19405.
Willford, J.A., Chandler, L.S., Goldschmidt, L. and Day, N.L. (2010). Effects of prenatal tobacco, alcohol
and marijuana exposure on processing speed, visual-motor coordination, and interhemispheric transfer.
Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 32, 580–588.

Nonpsychological Adverse Effects

Winsauer, P.J., Molina, P.E. and Amedee, A.M., et al. (2011). Tolerance to chronic delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ⁹-THC) in rhesus macaques infected with simian immunodeficiency virus. Experimental and
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 19, 154–172.
Wolff, V., Armspach, J.P. and Lauer V., et al. (2013). Cannabis-related stroke: Myth or reality? Stroke; A
Journal of Cerebral Circulation, 44, 558–563.
Wong, B.S., Camilleri, M. and Busciglio, I., et al. (2011). Pharmacogenetic trial of a cannabinoid agonist shows reduced fasting colonic motility in patients with nonconstipated irritable bowel syndrome.
Gastroenterology, 141, 1638–1647.
Wong, B.S., Camilleri, M. and Eckert, D., et al. (2012). Randomized pharmacodynamic and pharmacogenetic trial of dronabinol effects on colon transit in irritable bowel syndrome-diarrhea.
Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 24, 358–e169.
Yamaori, S., Koeda, K., Kushihara, M., Hada, Y., Yamamoto, I. and Watanabe K. (2012). Comparison in
the in vitro inhibitory effects of major phytocannabinoids and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons contained in marijuana smoke on cytochrome P450 2C9 activity. Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics,
27, 294–300.
Zajicek, J.P., Sanders, H.P. and Wright, D.E., et al. (2005). Cannabinoids in multiple sclerosis (CAMS)
study: safety and efficacy data for 12 months follow up. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and
Psychiatry, 76, 1664–1669.
Zhao, Y., Liu, Y. and Zhang, W., et al. (2010). WIN55212-2 ameliorates atherosclerosis associated with
suppression of pro-inflammatory responses in ApoE-knockout mice. European Journal of Pharmacology,
649, 285–292.

691

Chapter 39

Harm Reduction Policies for Cannabis
Wayne Hall and Louisa Degenhardt

39.1 Introduction
Cannabis is the most widely used recreational illicit drug globally, and its use has probably
increased over the past decade. In 2011, an estimated 119–224 million adults (2.5–6.0% of the
global adult population aged 15–64 years) had used cannabis in the previous year (UNODC
2012). In the World Mental Health Surveys, the lifetime use of cannabis was higher in the US and
New Zealand than in Europe, which had higher rates of reported cannabis use than the Middle
East, Africa, and Asia (Degenhardt et al. 2008).
In most countries cannabis use for recreational reasons begins in the mid to late teens and is
most common in the early 20s (Degenhardt et al. 2008; Hall and Degenhardt 2009). Most cannabis use is intermittent and time-limited (Bachman et al. 1997), with about 10% of users becoming daily users, and another 20–30% weekly users (Hall and Pacula 2010). Cannabis use declines
during the early to mid 20s as young adults enter full-time employment, marry, and have children
(Anthony 2006; Bachman et al. 1997; Fergusson et al. 2012).
Cannabis is also used for medicinal reasons although this type of use is much less common than
recreational use. The focus of this chapter is on policies that aim to reduce harm from recreational
cannabis use.

39.2 What are harm reduction policies?
The term “harm reduction” was first used in the area of injecting drug use to describe policies to
prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS among drug injectors without requiring abstinence of them e.g.,
advising injectors not to share injecting equipment and providing clean needles and syringes to
reduce sharing (Riley et al. 2012). Harm reduction has since expanded to cover polices that aim to
reduce the harmful consequences of all types of drug use without necessarily requiring drug users
to stop or reduce their drug use (IHRA 2010; Lenton and Single 1998).
Advocates of harm reduction accept that some people will engage in risky patterns of illegal
drug use, despite the efforts of government and civil society to discourage such use. They attach a
higher priority to keeping these people alive and preventing serious damage to their health than
insisting upon abstinence as the only acceptable goal. They encourage problem drug users to seek
treatment, but users who are not interested in treatment are advised on how to reduce harms
arising from their drug use using approaches that are practical, feasible, effective, safe, and costeffective (Carter et al. 2012), such as: user-based education about injecting and overdose risks,
providing clean needles and syringes, and distributing opioid antagonists to revive drug users
who overdose (Darke and Hall 1997; Strang and Farrell 1992).
Harm reduction policies for cannabis have been underdeveloped by comparison with those for
injected drugs. This seems to be for two main reasons (Hall and Pacula 2010). First, many who

Harm Reduction Policies for Cannabis

advocate for more liberal cannabis policies do not accept that cannabis use harms users; they
claim that the harms arising from criminal records cause greater harms than cannabis use (Wodak
et al. 2002). Second, those who support a continuation of current cannabis policies oppose harm
reduction because they argue that this approach implicitly condones cannabis use. In their view,
the only acceptable policies are criminal penalties for cannabis use and abstinence orientedtreatment for problem cannabis users (DuPont 1996).
We do not accept either of these views. There is good evidence that cannabis use harms some
users (Hall and Degenhardt 2009) and given this, there is a strong ethical case for warning cannabis users about these risks. We also believe that harm reduction advice to current cannabis users
need not condone use; such advice can be an effective way of communicating the risks of cannabis
use to users who reject the advocacy of abstinence.
We consider approaches to reducing cannabis-related harm under the following three headings:
(1) advice to cannabis users about how to reduce their risks to themselves and others; (2) specific
interventions for problem cannabis users to reduce these risks; (3) policies that combine education with fines or criminal sanctions to deter people from using cannabis in ways that may harm
others, e.g., driving a motor vehicle while cannabis-impaired; and (4) legislative approaches that
aim to reduce the harms of cannabis prohibition by removing or reducing penalties for cannabis
use and possession.
A harm reduction approach to cannabis use (Fischer and Kendall 2011; Hall 1995; Swift et al. 2000)
requires a specification of the harms that cannabis use can cause and of the patterns of use most likely to
produce these harms. We therefore first summarize what is known about the connection between cannabis use and various harms before considering ways in which these harms can be reduced. We begin
with the harms of acute cannabis use: those that can occur after a single occasion of use, focusing on
the harm that can potentially most seriously affect cannabis users and other persons, i.e., motor vehicle
accidents caused by cannabis-impaired drivers. We then consider harms arising from chronic use, that
is daily or near daily use over periods of months or years. These harms primarily affect cannabis users.

39.3 Harms of acute cannabis use
39.3.1 Accidental injury and death in car crashes

Cannabis and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) produce dose-related impairments in laboratory
measures of reaction time, information processing, perceptual-motor coordination, motor performance, attention, and tracking (Ramaekers et al. 2004; Solowij 1998). All these effects could
increase the risk of accidents if users drive a car while acutely intoxicated.
Experimental studies of the effects of cannabis upon driving have reported more modest
impairments than intoxicating doses of alcohol. Cannabis-impaired drivers appear to be more
aware that they are impaired and attempt to compensate for their impairment by driving more
slowly and taking fewer risks than alcohol-impaired drivers (Smiley 1999). But not all cannabisrelated impairment can be compensated for: drivers’ responses to simulated emergency situations
are impaired by cannabis use (Robbe 1994; Smiley 1999).
Epidemiological studies (Drummer et al. 2004; Gerberich et al. 2003; Laumon et al. 2005; Mura
et al. 2003) also indicate that cannabis users who drive while intoxicated are at increased risk
of motor vehicle crashes. Gerberich et al. (2003) found that cannabis users had higher rates of
hospitalization for injury from all causes than former cannabis users or nonusers in a cohort of
64,657 patients from a US Health Maintenance Organization. Mura et al. (2003) found a similar
relationship in a study of 900 persons hospitalized for motor vehicle injuries and 900 age- and
sex-matched controls admitted to French hospitals. Drummer et al. (2004), who assessed THC in

693

694

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

blood in 1420 Australian drivers killed in accidents, found that cannabis users were more likely
to be culpable (odds ratio (OR) = 2.5) and those with THC levels greater than 5 micrograms/mL
had a higher accident risk (OR = 6.6) than those without THC. Laumon et al. (2005) compared
blood THC levels in 6766 culpable and 3006 nonculpable drivers in France between October 2001
and September 2003. They found increased culpability among drivers with THC levels of greater
than 1 microgram/ml (OR = 2.87). A dose–response relationship between THC and culpability
persisted after controlling for blood alcohol concentration, age, and time of accident.
A systematic review of the epidemiological evidence by Asbridge and colleagues (2012) analyzed the role of cannabis in fatal and nonfatal accidents in nine case–control and culpability
studies. Recent cannabis use approximately doubled the risk of motor vehicle crashes (OR = 1.92
95% CI: 1.35, 2.73) and the risk was higher in studies that were better designed (2.21 vs. 1.78), in
case–control rather than culpability studies (2.79 vs. 1.65) and in studies of fatalities rather than
injuries (2.10 vs. 1.74). The twofold increase in the risk of motor vehicle crashes after using cannabis compares with a 6–15 times higher risk for alcohol. Mura et al. (2003) estimated that 2.5%
of fatal accidents in France could be attributed to cannabis compared with 29% for alcohol.
39.3.2 Reducing cannabis-impaired driving

Cannabis users should refrain from driving within several hours of using cannabis, but it is uncertain how many will act on road safety education campaigns that provide such advice. Similar campaigns to discourage alcohol-impaired driving had limited effects on their own (Homel 1988). More
effective deterrence combines public education with well-publicized enforcement of laws that forbid driving while alcohol intoxicated, usually defined as driving with a blood alcohol content (BAC)
above a specified level (typically 0.08% or 0.05%). The deterrent effect of these laws is enhanced by
random roadside alcohol breath testing (RBT) accompanied by publicity campaigns that alert drivers to the risk of detection and loss of license if they drive while intoxicated (Homel 1988).
Cannabis users will also need to be persuaded that they are at risk of being detected if they drive
while impaired (Watling et al. 2010). Governments in Australia, Western Europe, and the US
have pursued such deterrence by introducing roadside drug testing (RDT) for cannabis (Butler
2007). This has been modelled on RBT but uses a saliva test to detect recent use of cannabis. RDT
does not use an epidemiological rationale for a specified level of detected cannabis use to define
impaired driving like that for alcohol. In the case of RBT for alcohol, there is a simple relationship between alcohol breath concentration, blood alcohol level, and impairment, with the risk
of a crash doubling after 0.05%. It has been more difficult to define cannabis-impaired driving
because of the lack of a simple relationship between blood levels of THC and impaired driving
(Grotenhermen et al. 2007). Governments that have introduced such testing (Butler 2007) have
defined any detectable level of cannabis in saliva (which is indicative of recent use) as evidence of
impairment. The Australian State of Victoria introduced this type of RDT saliva testing in 2004;
so have other Australian States since, and 13 US states (Butler 2007; Lacey et al. 2010).
Legislators in these countries have assumed that RDT will reduce road crash deaths in the same
way that RBT reduced alcohol-related crashes (Henstridge et al. 1997; Lacey et al. 2010). This may
be an optimistic assumption, because of major differences in the ways that RBT and RDT have
been implemented. RBT in Australia has been accompanied by widespread publicity campaigns
and high rates of roadside testing (Homel 1988). RDT, by contrast, has typically been introduced
on a small scale, with much less publicity, and unknown deterrent effects (Watling et al. 2010).
Nearly a decade after its introduction, political support for RDT still relies on borrowing evidence
of effectiveness from RBT, because there is no direct evidence that RDT has reduced cannabis- or
other drug-related fatalities or deterred drug users from driving while impaired.

Harm Reduction Policies for Cannabis

A more harm reduction-focused version of RDT would use measures of cannabis use that predicted impaired driving. Such an approach has been advocated by Grotenhermen et al. (2007).
This could be combined with educational campaigns to encourage cannabis users to adopt “designated driver” programs.

39.4 The harms of chronic cannabis use
In the absence of measures of the doses of THC that regular users typically consume, “chronic”
cannabis use has usually been defined in epidemiological studies as near daily cannabis use
over months or years. This is the pattern of use that has been most consistently associated with
adverse health outcomes in adolescence and adulthood (Hall and Degenhardt 2009). The major
challenge in interpreting these studies is in ruling out alternative explanations of the associations
between regular cannabis use and these outcomes. Heavy cannabis use is highly correlated with
regular alcohol, tobacco, and other illicit drug use, all of which can adversely affect health (Hall
and Pacula 2010). Regular cannabis users also differ from nonusers (before they use cannabis) in
ways that may affect their risk of experiencing these adverse outcomes (Hall and Pacula 2010).
Statistical control of confounding has been used to assess these relationships, but there are epidemiologists who argue that this strategy cannot wholly exclude confounding (Hall and Pacula
2010; Macleod et al. 2004).
39.4.1 Cannabis dependence

Cannabis dependence is characterized by impaired control over cannabis use, and difficulty in
ceasing use despite harms caused by it. In Australia, Canada, and the US, cannabis dependence is
the most common type of drug dependence after dependence upon alcohol and tobacco (Hall and
Pacula 2010). It affects 1–2% of adults in the past year, and 4–8% of adults during their lifetime.
Over the past two decades, increasing numbers of persons have sought help to stop using cannabis
in the US, Europe, and Australia (Hall and Pacula 2010). After tobacco and alcohol, cannabis was
the most common form of drug dependence in the US in the 1990s and early 2000s (Anthony
2006). The same was true in Australia in the late 1990s (Roxburgh et al. 2010).
The lifetime risk of dependence among US cannabis users was estimated at 9% (Anthony 2006)
in the early 1990s and at one in six among those who initiated in adolescence (Anthony 2006). The
equivalent risks were 32% for nicotine, 23% for heroin, 17% for cocaine, 15% for alcohol and 11%
for stimulant users (Anthony et al. 1994).
39.4.2 Reducing the risks of cannabis dependence

Harm reduction approaches to cannabis dependence are underdeveloped (Hall and Swift 2006).
Current and potential cannabis users should be informed about the risks of developing cannabis
dependence, probably a still underappreciated risk of cannabis use. Research is needed into the
most persuasive ways of informing young people about the risks of dependence. The following are
suggestions about the type of advice that could be given:
◆
◆

◆

Cannabis users can become dependent on cannabis.
The risk is around 10%, a little lower than that for alcohol, nicotine, and opiates (Hall and
Degenhardt 2009) but risk increases the younger the age that a person begins to use (Anthony
2006).
Using cannabis more than weekly increases the risks of dependence and probably increases the
risks of other adverse effects of use (Hall and Degenhardt 2009).

695

696

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Plausible harm reduction strategies for cannabis can be modelled on strategies that have been
used to reduce alcohol-related harm (Hall and Swift 2006). These could include screening and
brief advice for heavy cannabis consumers seen in general practice, hospital, or nonmedical
settings (Fischer et al. 2009). Research is needed to assess whether these approaches reduce consumption and problems as do similar approaches for problem alcohol use (e.g., Babor et al. 2010a;
Shand et al. 2003). This approach could be used, for example, with young adults who present with
respiratory problems and anxiety and depression in primary care (Degenhardt et al. 2001).
Brief interventions could also be targeted at populations in which cannabis dependence is
known to be high, e.g., youth mental health services, juvenile justice centers, and college students
(Fischer et al. 2009; Hall et al. 2008). A “check-up” approach modelled on the Brief Drinker
Check-up (Miller and Sovereign 1989) provides a promising way of raising the health risks of
cannabis use in a nonconfrontational way (see Berghuis et al. 2006; Martin and Copeland 2008;
Stephens et al. 2007).
There are limited harm reduction options for those who require assistance to deal with cannabis
dependence. Cognitive behavioral therapy reduces cannabis use and cannabis-related problems,
but only 15% of those treated remain abstinent 6–12 months after treatment (Hall and Pacula
2010). Pharmacological treatments have been trialed to reduce severity of withdrawal syndrome,
but trials have so far found modest efficacy (Danovitch and Gorelick 2012). Abstinence-based
12-step approaches (e.g., Marijuana Anonymous) that involve changing friendship networks that
encourage cannabis use and using self-help support groups to sustain abstinence remain to be
evaluated.
39.4.3 The respiratory risks of cannabis smoking

Regular cannabis smokers report more chronic bronchitis (wheeze, sputum production, and
chronic coughs) than nonsmokers (Tetrault et al. 2007). The immunological competence of the
respiratory system is also impaired, increasing cannabis users’ health service use for respiratory
infections (Tashkin et al. 2002).
The effects of long-term cannabis smoking on respiratory function are less certain (Howden
and Naughton 2011; Lee and Hancox 2011; Tetrault et al. 2007). A longitudinal study of 1037
New Zealand youths followed until the age of 26 (Taylor et al. 2002) found impaired respiratory
function in cannabis dependent users, but this was not replicated in a longer-term follow-up of
US users (Tashkin et al. 2002). Chronic cannabis smoking has not been found to increase the risk
of emphysema in follow-ups over 8 years in cannabis-only smokers in the US (Tashkin 2005) or
New Zealand (Aldington et al. 2007).
Cannabis smoke contains many of the same carcinogens as tobacco smoke, some at higher
levels (Moir et al. 2008). It is also mutagenic and carcinogenic in the mouse skin test, and chronic
cannabis smokers show pathological changes in lung cells (Tashkin 1999). Epidemiological studies, however, have not so far found increased risks of upper respiratory tract cancers. Sidney et al.
(1997) found no increased risk of respiratory cancer among current or former cannabis users in
an 8.6 year follow-up of 64,855 members of the Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program. Zhang
et al. (1999) reported an increased risk (OR = 2) of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck
among cannabis users in 173 cases and 176 controls that persisted after adjusting for cigarette
smoking, alcohol use, and other risk factors. Three other case–control studies of these cancers,
however, have failed to find any such association (Hashibe et al. 2005).
Case–control studies of lung cancer have produced more consistent associations with cannabis
use, but their interpretation is complicated by confounding by cigarette smoking (Mehra et al.
2006). A pooled analysis of three Moroccan case–control studies also found an elevated risk of

Harm Reduction Policies for Cannabis

lung cancer among cannabis smokers but all of them also smoked tobacco (Berthiller et al. 2008).
A New Zealand case–control study of lung cancer in 79 adults under the age of 55 years and 324
community controls (Aldington et al. 2008) found a dose–response relationship between frequency of cannabis use and lung cancer risk. A US case–control study found a simple association
between cannabis smoking and head and neck and lung cancers but these associations were no
longer significant after controlling for tobacco use (Hashibe et al. 2006). Larger cohort and better
designed case–control studies are needed to clarify whether there are any such risks from chronic
cannabis smoking (Hashibe et al. 2005; Howden and Naughton 2011).
39.4.4 Cardiovascular risks of cannabis smoking

Cannabis and THC increase heart rate in a dose-related way, but healthy young adults quickly
develop tolerance to these effects (Jones 2002; Sidney 2002). Cannabis smoking may precipitate
myocardial infarctions in older adults with cardiovascular disease (Jones 2002; Sidney 2002).
A case-crossover study by Mittleman et al. (2001) of 3882 patients who had had a myocardial
infarction found that cannabis use increased the risk of a myocardial infarction 4.8 times in the
hour after use. A prospective study of 1913 of these adults found a dose–response relationship
between cannabis use and mortality over 3.8 years (Mukamal et al. 2008), with the risk increased
2.5 times for those who used less than weekly and 4.2 times among more than weekly users. These
findings are supported by laboratory findings that smoking cannabis provokes angina in patients
with heart disease (Gottschalk et al. 1977). Given the low prevalence of cannabis smoking in older
adults, cannabis smoking is estimated to account for a smaller proportion of myocardial infarctions than air pollution (Nawrot et al. 2011).
39.4.5 Reducing the respiratory and cardiovascular risks of cannabis

smoking

The respiratory risks of cannabis smoking would be eliminated if cannabis users used the oral
route of administration. This is unlikely to happen, because most regular cannabis users find
smoking the most efficient way to titrate their dose of THC (Grotenhermen 2004; Iversen 2007).
Putatively “safer” forms of cannabis smoking, such as water pipes, have become popular in
Australia (Hall and Swift 2000), but research suggests that water pipes deliver more tar per dose
of THC than joints (Gowing et al. 2000). It is unclear how much the respiratory risks of cannabis
smoking might be reduced if users were to smoke a smaller amount of more potent cannabis
(Melamede 2005) because it is unclear whether cannabis users can reliably titrate their dose and,
if they can, whether they do so (Hall and Pacula 2010).
Vaporizers are a potentially promising way of reducing the carcinogens and toxicants inhaled in
cannabis smoke (Gieringer et al. 2004; Grotenhermen 2004; Melamede 2005). They deliver inhaled
THC without carcinogens and toxicants by heating rather than burning cannabis. Gieringer et al.
(2004) found that a Volcano® vaporizer achieved a similar delivery of THC to a cannabis cigarette
while very substantially reducing the amount of carcinogens. Hazekamp et al. (2006) found that
the same device had acceptable safety properties in delivering pure THC but Bloor et al. (2008)
found that levels of released ammonia were still well above recommended safe levels.
Abrams et al. (2007) compared the effects of varying doses of cannabis delivered by a Volcano®
and a joint in 18 subjects under double-blind conditions. The vaporizer delivered similar amounts
of THC and produced similar psychological effects, with 16/18 subjects preferring the vaporizer.
They did not test for delivery of tars and carcinogens, but found lower carbon monoxide levels
in blood after using a vaporizer. Earleywine and Barnwell (2007) found that vaporizer users

697

698

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

recruited via the Internet reported fewer respiratory symptoms. The rate of respiratory symptoms
(bronchitis, wheeze, breathlessness) among 150 persons who only used vaporizers was 40% of
that reported by cannabis smokers (after controlling for cigarette smoking, duration of use and
amount typically used). More research needs to be done to evaluate the long term safety of vaporizers in reducing the respiratory risks of cannabis use.
39.4.6 Cognitive impairment

Deficits in verbal learning, memory, and attention are reported by heavy cannabis users, but these
have not been consistently related to duration and frequency of use or cumulative dose of THC
(Solowij et al. 2002). Debate continues about whether these deficits are due to acute drug effects,
residual drug effects, or the effects of cumulative THC exposure (Solowij et al. 2002).
A recent prospective study (Meier et al. 2012) greatly strengthened the case that regular cannabis use, starting in adolescence and continuing throughout young adulthood, can cause cognitive decline in mid adulthood. In this study the authors examined changes in overall IQ and
in specific cognitive abilities from early adolescence to mid adulthood in a cohort of 1037 New
Zealanders born in Dunedin in 1972/1973. A detailed neuropsychological assessment was done
at age 13 (before cannabis was first used) and again at age 38. There was a dose–response relationship between cannabis use and cognitive decline that persisted after adjustment for other factors
known to affect cognitive abilities (e.g., recent cannabis use, alcohol, tobacco and other drug
use, and schizophrenia). The cognitive decline was largest in those who began to use cannabis in
adolescence and used regularly into adulthood. The decline was not explained by the lower educational achievement among cannabis users, because the effects were also found in cannabis users
who finished high school. There was limited cognitive recovery in adolescent-onset users who
had only stopped using cannabis for a year or more. There was no cognitive decline in adult-onset
users who ceased cannabis use 12 months prior to interview. Key informants who knew the study
participants well were more likely to report that heavy persistent cannabis users had problems
with memory and attention than their peers who had not used the drug in this way.
39.4.7 Educational outcomes

Regular cannabis use in adolescence is associated with poor educational attainment (Lynskey and
Hall 2000) but it has been unclear whether: (1) cannabis use is a contributory cause, (2) cannabis
use is a consequence of poor educational attainment, or (3) cannabis use and poor educational
attainment are the result of other factors (Lynskey and Hall 2000).
Longitudinal studies have found a relationship between cannabis use before the age of 15 years
and early school leaving, and this has persisted after adjustment for confounders (e.g., Ellickson
et al. 1998). The most plausible hypothesis is that impaired educational outcomes reflect a combination of: a higher pre-existing risk of school failure, the effects of regular cannabis use on
cognitive performance, increased affiliation with peers who reject school, and a strong desire to
make an early transition to adulthood (Lynskey and Hall 2000). A recent meta-analysis of three
Australasian longitudinal studies by Horwood et al. (2010) suggested that the early use of cannabis
increases the rate of failure to complete high school, enroll at university, and complete a degree.
39.4.8 Other illicit drug use

In the US, Australia, and New Zealand, regular cannabis users were most likely to later use heroin
and cocaine, and the earlier they begin to use cannabis, the more likely they are to do so (Kandel
2002). Three explanations have been offered for these findings: (1) cannabis users have more

Harm Reduction Policies for Cannabis

opportunities to use other illicit drugs because they obtain cannabis from the same black market
as other illicit drugs, (2) early cannabis users are more likely to use other illicit drugs for reasons
that are unrelated to their cannabis use, and (3) the pharmacological effects of cannabis increase
the propensity to use other illicit drugs (Hall and Pacula 2010).
There is some support for all three: young cannabis users report more opportunities to use
cocaine at an earlier age (Wagner and Anthony 2002); socially deviant young people (who are
more likely to use cocaine and heroin) start using cannabis at an earlier age than their peers
(Fergusson et al. 2008); a simulation study (Morral et al. 2002) has shown that if the second
hypothesis were true, it would predict the relationships observed between cannabis and other
illicit drug use; and animal studies suggest that cannabis, cocaine, and heroin all act on the brain’s
“reward center,” the nucleus accumbens (Gardner 1999), and that the cannabinoid and opioid
systems in the brain interact with each other (Manzanares et al. 1999).
The second hypothesis has been tested in longitudinal studies that assess whether cannabis
users are more likely to report heroin and cocaine use after statistically controlling for confounders (e.g., Lessem et al. 2006). Adjustment for confounders (Fergusson et al. 2006) attenuates but
does not eliminate the relationships between regular cannabis use and other illicit drug use (Hall
and Lynskey 2005). Studies of twins discordant for cannabis use (Lynskey et al. 2003) found that
the twin who had used cannabis was more likely to have used other illicit drugs than their cotwin who had not and the relationship persists after controlling for nonshared environmental
factors.
39.4.9 Psychosis and schizophrenia

A 15-year follow-up of 50,465 Swedish male conscripts found that those who had tried cannabis
by age 18 were 2.4 times more likely to be diagnosed with schizophrenia than those who had not
(Andréasson et al. 1987). The risk increased with the frequency of cannabis use and remained
significant after statistical adjustment for a limited set of confounding variables. Those who had
used cannabis ten or more times by age 18 were 2.3 times more likely to be diagnosed with schizophrenia than those who had not.
Zammit et al. (2002) reported a 27-year follow-up of the same cohort which also found a dose–
response relationship between frequency of cannabis use at age 18 and risk of schizophrenia during the follow-up period that persisted after statistically controlling for other confounding factors.
They estimated that 13% of cases of schizophrenia could be averted if all cannabis use were prevented. Zammit et al.’s findings have been supported by longitudinal studies in the Netherlands
(van Os et al. 2002), Germany (Henquet et al. 2004), and New Zealand (Arseneault et al. 2002;
Fergusson et al. 2003), all of which found a similar relationship that persisted after adjustment for
confounders.
A meta-analysis of these longitudinal studies reported a pooled OR of 1.4 (95% confidence
interval (CI): 1.20, 1.65) of psychotic symptoms or psychotic disorder among those who had
ever used cannabis (Moore et al. 2007). The risk of psychotic symptoms or psychotic disorders
was higher in regular users (OR = 2.09 (95% CI: 1.54, 2.84)). Reverse causation was implausible because, in most of these studies, cases reporting psychotic symptoms at baseline were
excluded or the relationship persisted after statistical adjustment for pre-existing psychotic
symptoms. The hypothesis that cannabis use and psychosis are both caused by confounding
factors was harder to exclude because the association between cannabis use and psychosis was
attenuated after statistical adjustment for potential confounders and no study assessed all major
confounders.

699

700

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

The evidence is conflicting on whether the incidence of schizophrenia has increased as cannabis use has increased among young adults, as would be expected if the relationship were causal.
An Australian study did not find clear evidence of increased psychosis incidence despite steep
increases in cannabis use during the 1980s and 1990s (Degenhardt et al. 2003). A British study
(Hickman et al. 2007) suggested that it was too early to detect any increased incidence in Britain
in the 1990s. Another British (Boydell et al. 2006) and a Swiss study (Ajdacic-Gross et al. 2007)
reported increased incidence of psychoses in recent birth cohorts but a third British study failed
to do so (Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs 2008).
39.4.10 Cannabis use and other mental disorders and symptoms

Less consistent and weaker relationships have been reported between regular cannabis use and depression. Fergusson and Horwood (1997), for example, found a dose–response relationship between
frequency of cannabis use by age 16 and depressive disorder but the relationship was no longer statistically significant after adjusting for confounders. A meta-analysis of these studies (Moore et al. 2007)
found an association between cannabis use and depressive disorders (OR = 1.49 (95% CI: 1.15, 1.94)).
The authors argued, however, that these studies had not controlled for confounders, and had not
convincingly excluded the possibility that depressed young people are more likely to use cannabis.
Several case–control studies have found a relationship between cannabis use and suicide in
adolescents but it is unclear whether this is causal. For example, a New Zealand case control
study (Beautrais et al. 1999) of serious suicide found that 16% of the 302 suicide attempters had
a cannabis disorder compared with 2% of the 1028 community controls. Controlling for social
disadvantage, depression, and alcohol dependence reduced but did not eliminate the association
(OR = 2). The evidence from prospective studies is mixed. Fergusson and Horwood (1997), for
example, found a dose–response relationship between frequency of cannabis use by age 16 and a
self-reported suicide attempt but the association did not persist after controlling for confounders.
Patton et al. (1997) found that cannabis was associated with self-harmful behavior among females
but not males, after controlling for depression and alcohol use. A meta-analysis (Moore et al.
2007) of these studies reported that they were too heterogeneous to estimate risk, and few had
excluded reverse causation or properly controlled for confounding.
39.4.11 Reducing harms from adolescent cannabis use

The epidemiological evidence on cannabis dependence and adverse effects on cognitive performance and poorer educational outcomes provides good reasons for reducing cannabis-related
harm among adolescents. Even if cannabis use is not a direct cause of illicit drug use, regular
cannabis use probably increases opportunities to use other drugs. The risks of psychosis may be
modest, but the severity of the outcome warrants preventive attention on prudential grounds.
The undecided issue is how best to discourage early and regular cannabis use in adolescents.
Educational campaigns to discourage use are of limited value, with their effectiveness ranging
from modest, at best, having no impact in most cases, to in some cases, increasing experimentation (Babor et al. 2010b). We need to be realistic about the impacts of educational messages
(Caulkins et al. 2004; White and Pitts 1998). Small, statistically significant reductions in cannabis
use may be observed in well-conducted programs (Caulkins et al. 2004; Gorman 1995; Tobler
et al. 1999; White and Pitts 1998) but the primary impact is on knowledge rather than behavior
(White and Pitts 1998). Behavior change is more likely to occur among less frequent rather than
heavier users (Gorman 1995). The best way to deliver the advice will depend upon good social
marketing research on the views of young people (Grier and Bryant 2005).

Harm Reduction Policies for Cannabis

Young people need to be made aware of the mental health risks of regular intoxication with both
alcohol and cannabis. They need to be told about high-risk groups, namely, those with a family history of psychosis, and those who have had unpleasant psychological experiences when using cannabis.
This education needs be directed at both cannabis users and their peers in order to increase recognition of these problems so that peers can encourage affected friends to cease using or seek help.
A challenge is framing the magnitude of the risk of psychosis for young people. The risk for any
individual who uses cannabis increases from around 7 in 1000 (Saha et al. 2005) to 14 in 1000.
The temptation is to argue that everyone is at risk because it is difficult to predict who is most
vulnerable. We think this a doubtful strategy that may undermine the credibility of the message
by being seen to exaggerate the risk.
Harm reduction approaches to cannabis may also be indirect. They could include more effective
parenting education such as Positive Parenting programs that aim to improve parental responses
to adolescent behavior in ways that reduce oppositional behavior and improve relations between
parents and adolescents. These programs appear to be effective in reducing oppositional and
conduct disorders and thereby indirectly, reducing adolescent alcohol and cannabis use (De Graaf
et al. 2008; Sanders 2012).
39.4.12 Interventions with high-risk populations

Early intervention programs to reduce cannabis use in adolescents and high-risk youth are a
plausible approach that is worthy of research. To date, most attention has been paid to reducing
cannabis use in young people with psychoses or other symptoms of poor mental health. Results of
these interventions have so far not been encouraging.
Young people who use cannabis and experience psychotic symptoms should be strongly encouraged to stop, and if they refuse to stop, counseled to reduce their frequency of use. The challenges
will be persuading young persons with schizophrenia to stop doing something they enjoy and to
help those who want to stop but find it difficult to do so.
Recent evaluations (see Roffman and Stephens 2006) of psychological interventions for cannabis dependence in persons without psychoses report modest rates of abstinence at the end of
treatment (20–40%) and substantial rates of relapse thereafter (Denis et al. 2006). Many persons
with schizophrenia have characteristics that predict a poor outcome, namely, they: lack social
support, may be cognitively impaired, are often unemployed, and may not comply with treatment
(Kavanagh 1995; Mueser et al. 1992). There are very few controlled studies of substance abuse
treatment in schizophrenia (Lehman et al. 1993). A recent Cochrane review identified only six
relevant studies, four of which were small (Jeffery et al. 2004) and found no evidence that supported substance abuse treatment in schizophrenia over standard care.
39.4.13 Reducing the harms of higher THC cannabis products

Concerns have been expressed over the last 20 years that increased THC content of cannabis products will increase their adverse effects (Hall and Pacula 2010). Recent studies suggest that THC
content increased during the late 1990s (McLaren et al. 2008). Any health effects of increased THC
dose will depend on whether users are able and willing to titrate their dose of THC. A higher THC
content may increase anxiety, depression, and psychotic symptoms in naive users while increasing
the risk of dependence and psychotic symptoms if regular users do not titrate their dose. Adverse
effects on the respiratory and cardiovascular systems may be reduced if regular users titrate their
dose of THC and reduce the amount they smoke. Increased THC content could also increase the
risk of road traffic crashes if users drive while more heavily intoxicated (Hall and Pacula 2010).

701

702

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

There are potential policies to reduce the harms of increased THC levels in cannabis products.
This could include: evaluating advice to users on the desirability of titrating the use of high THC
cannabis products; imposing higher legal penalties on the cultivation and sale of cannabis products with higher THC levels; and in countries with de facto legal cannabis markers, regulating the
THC (and possibly the cannabidiol) content in cannabis that is offered for sale.

39.5 Reducing the harms of cannabis prohibition
In most developed countries cannabis users can, in theory, be sentenced to prison if caught using
by police. Such prison sentences are rarely imposed but a criminal conviction for using cannabis can still be acquired that may adversely affect the lives of users (Lenton 2000). Some critics
argue that these social harms from an arrest or conviction are more serious than any harms that
result from using cannabis (Wodak et al. 2002), e.g., by impeding employment opportunities and
adversely affecting personal relationships (Room et al. 2008). Research on users prosecuted for
cannabis use (Erickson 1980; Lenton et al. 1999a, 1999b) also suggests that a criminal conviction
has no effect on their cannabis use.
The removal of criminal penalties for personal use is one way of reducing the adverse effects
on detected users. The Netherlands was one of the first European countries to do so in 1976 and
Portugal has recently done so. Studies of the impact of these changes have typically found that
they have little effect on rates of population cannabis use in Australia (e.g., Donnelly et al. 1999),
the US (Pacula et al. 2004), and European countries including the Netherlands (Greenwald 2009;
Room et al. 2008). This suggests that this policy change has little or no effect on cannabis-related
harms while reducing enforcement costs (Room et al. 2008).
An unintended consequence of depenalization via civil penalties could be an increase in numbers of persons fined by the police, an effect referred to as “net widening.” This occurs because the
police find it easier and less time-consuming to impose a fine than to arrest and process a criminal
charge. If more fines are issued and offenders do not pay their fines, then more cannabis users
may end up in prison for fine-default than would be the case if cannabis use remained a criminal
offence (Room et al. 2008). The removal or the nonenforcement of any penalties for personal
use (as in the Netherlands) avoids this problem (Hall and Pacula 2010; Room et al. 2008) as does
enforcing payment of fines in ways that avoid imprisonment (Room et al. 2008).

39.6 Research priorities for cannabis harm reduction
Research is needed on the effectiveness of these proposed ways of reducing the harms of cannabis
use. Among the priorities for future inquiry are the following questions:
◆

What do cannabis users believe are the harms of using cannabis?

◆

Are they persuaded by the type of evidence presented for these adverse effects?

◆

Are they prepared to act on advice about how to reduce these harms?

◆

◆

◆

Does roadside drug testing deter cannabis users from driving while intoxicated? If so, does this
reduce motor vehicle accident fatalities? Does it do so at an acceptable social and economic cost?
Are there better ways than deterrence policies to reduce risks related to cannabis and driving?
Do adolescent users accept that cannabis use can be harmful? Are they prepared to act on
harm reduction advice? Are brief interventions in medical or nonmedical settings effective in
changing risk patterns of use or practices?
Do vaporizers substantially reduce the respiratory risks of cannabis smoking?

Harm Reduction Policies for Cannabis

◆
◆

Do cannabis users titrate their doses of THC?
Could regulation of the content of cannabinoids such as cannabidiol (Morgan et al. 2010)
reduce some the adverse effects of cannabis use?

Priorities for research on the effects of harm reduction measures for legal policies such as depenalization and decriminalization include the following:
◆

◆
◆

Do depenalization or decriminalization policies change patterns or rates of cannabis use, or
attitudes towards cannabis use, especially among vulnerable/high-risk populations?
How will more tolerant policies for cannabis use affect access to or use of other illicit drugs?
Do decriminalization approaches result in tangible savings of public resources (e.g., enforcement time)?

Acknowledgment
This is an extensively revised version of material originally published in: Hall, W. and Fischer, B.
Harm reduction policies for cannabis. Chapter 8 pp. 257–276 in T. Rhodes and D. Hedrich (eds.).
Harm Reduction; Evidence, Impacts and Challenges. European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and
Drug Addiction Monograph 10, Lisbon, 2010.

References
Abrams, D., Vizoso, H., Shade, S., Jay, C., Kelly, M., and Benowitz, N. (2007). Vaporization as a smokeless
cannabis delivery system: a pilot study. Clinical Psychopharmacology & Therapeutics, 82, 572–578.
Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs. (2008). Cannabis: Classification and Public Health. London:
Home Office.
Ajdacic-Gross, V., Lauber, C., Warnke, I., Haker, H., Murray, R.M., and Rossler, W. (2007). Changing
incidence of psychotic disorders among the young in Zurich. Schizophrenia Research, 95, 9–18.
Aldington, S., Williams, M., Nowitz, M., et al. (2007). Effects of cannabis on pulmonary structure, function and symptoms. Thorax, 62, 1058–1063.
Aldington, S., Harwood, M., Cox, B., et al. (2008). Cannabis use and risk of lung cancer: a case-control
study. European Respiratory Journal, 31, 280–286.
Andréasson, S., Engstrom, A., Allebeck, P., and Rydberg, U. (1987). Cannabis and schizophrenia: a longitudinal study of Swedish conscripts. Lancet, 2, 1483–1486.
Anthony, J.C., Warner, L., and Kessler, R. (1994). Comparative epidemiology of dependence on tobacco,
alcohol, controlled substances and inhalants: basic findings from the National Comorbidity Survey.
Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 2, 244–268.
Anthony, J.C. (2006). The epidemiology of cannabis dependence. In: R.A. Roffman and R.S. Stephens
(eds.). Cannabis Dependence: Its Nature, Consequences and Treatment. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 58–105.
Arseneault, L., Cannon, M., Poulton, R., Murray, R., Caspi, A., and Moffitt, T.E. (2002). Cannabis use in
adolescence and risk for adult psychosis: Longitudinal prospective study. British Medical Journal, 325,
1212–1213.
Asbridge, M., Hayden, J.A., and Cartwright, J.L. (2012). Acute cannabis consumption and motor vehicle
collision risk: systematic review of observational studies and meta-analysis. BMJ, 344, e536.
Babor, T., Caetano, R., Casswell, S., et al. (2010a). Alcohol: No Ordinary Commodity: Research and Public
Policy. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Babor, T., Caulkins, J.P., Edwards, G., et al. (2010b). Drug Policy and the Public Good. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

703

704

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Bachman, J.G., Wadsworth, K.N., O’Malley, P.M., Johnston, L.D., and Schulenberg, J. (1997). Smoking,
Drinking, and Drug Use in Young Adulthood: The Impacts of New Freedoms and New Responsibilities.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Beautrais, A.L., Joyce, P.R., and Mulder, R.T. (1999). Cannabis abuse and serious suicide attempts.
Addiction, 94, 1155–1164.
Berghuis, J.P., Swift, W., Roffman, R., Stephens, R., and Copeland, J. (2006). The teen cannabis checkup: Exploring strategies for reaching young cannabis users. In: R.A. Roffman and R.S. Stephens (eds.).
Cannabis Dependence: Its Nature, Consequences and Treatment. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 275–292.
Berthiller, J., Straif, K., Boniol, M., et al. (2008). Cannabis smoking and risk of lung cancer in men: a
pooled analysis of three studies in Maghreb. Journal of Thoracic Oncology, 3, 1398–1403.
Bloor, R.N., Wang, T.S., Spanel, P., and Smith, D. (2008). Ammonia release from heated ‘street’ cannabis
leaf and its potential toxic effects on cannabis users. Addiction, 103, 1671–1677.
Boydell, J., van Os, J., Caspi, A., et al. (2006). Trends in cannabis use prior to first presentation with schizophrenia, in South-East London between 1965 and 1999. Psychological Medicine, 36, 1441–1446.
Butler, M. (2007). Australia’s approach to drugs and driving. Of Substance: The National Magazine on
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Other Drugs, 5, 24–26.
Carter, A., Miller, P.G., and Hall, W. (2012). The ethics of harm reduction. In: R. Pates and D. Riley (eds.).
Harm Reduction in Substance Use and High Risk Behaviour: International Policy and Practice. Chichester:
Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 111–123.
Caulkins, J.P., Pacula, R.L., Paddock, S., and Chiesa, J. (2004). What we can – and cannot –expect from
school-based drug prevention. Drug and Alcohol Review, 23, 79–87.
Danovitch, I. and Gorelick, D.A. (2012). State of the art treatments for cannabis dependence. Psychiatric
Clinics of North America, 35, 309–326.
Darke, S. and Hall, W.D. (1997). The distribution of naloxone to heroin users. Addiction, 92, 1195–1199.
De Graaf, I., Speetjens, P., Smit, F., de Wolff, M., and Tavecchio, L. (2008). Effectiveness of Triple
P Positive Parenting program on behavioural problems in children: a meta-analysis. Behavior
Modification, 23, 714–735.
Degenhardt, L., Chiu, W., Sampson, N., et al. (2008). Toward a global view of alcohol, tobacco, cannabis
and cocaine use: findings from the WHO World Mental Health Surveys. PLoS Medicine, 5, e141.
Degenhardt, L., Hall, W., and Lynskey, M.T. (2001). The relationship between cannabis use, depression
and anxiety among Australian adults: findings from the National Survey of Mental Health and Wellbeing. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 36, 219–227.
Degenhardt, L., Hall, W.D., and Lynskey, M.T. (2003). Testing hypotheses about the relationship between
cannabis use and psychosis. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 71, 37–48.
Donnelly, N., Hall, W.D., and Christie, P. (1999). Effects of the Cannabis Expiation Notice Scheme on Levels
and Patterns of Cannabis Use in South Australia: Evidence from the National Drug Strategy Household
Surveys 1985–1995 (Vol. 37). Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service.
Drummer, O.H., Gerostamoulos, J., Batziris, H., et al. (2004). The involvement of drugs in drivers of
motor vehicles killed in Australian road traffic crashes. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 36, 239–248.
DuPont, R.L. (1996). Harm reduction and decriminalization in the United States: a personal perspective.
Substance Use and Misuse, 31, 1929–1945; discussion 1947–1972.
Earleywine, M. and Barnwell, S.S. (2007). Decreased respiratory symptoms in cannabis users who vaporize.
Harm Reduction Journal, 4, 11.
Ellickson, P., Bui, K., Bell, R., and McGuigan, K.A. (1998). Does early drug use increase the risk of dropping out of high school? Journal of Drug Issues, 28, 357–380.
Erickson, P.G. (1980). Cannabis Criminals: The Social Effects of Punishment on Drug Users. Toronto:
Addiction Research Foundation.

Harm Reduction Policies for Cannabis

Fergusson, D.M., Boden, J.M., and Horwood, L.J. (2006). Cannabis use and other illicit drug use: testing
the cannabis gateway hypothesis. Addiction, 101, 556–569.
Fergusson, D.M., Boden, J.M., and Horwood, L.J. (2008). The developmental antecedents of illicit drug
use: evidence from a 25-year longitudinal study. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 96, 165–177.
Fergusson, D.M., Boden, J.M., and John, H.L. (2012). Transition to parenthood and substance use disorders: findings from a 30-year longitudinal study. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 125, 295–300.
Fergusson, D.M. and Horwood, L.J. (1997). Early onset cannabis use and psychosocial adjustment in
young adults. Addiction, 92, 279–296.
Fergusson, D.M., Horwood, L.J., and Swain-Campbell, N.R. (2003). Cannabis dependence and psychotic
symptoms in young people. Psychological Medicine, 33, 15–21.
Fischer, B., Rehm, J., and Hall, W. (2009). Cannabis use in Canada: the need for a ‘public health’ approach.
Canadian Journal of Public Health, 100, 101–103.
Fischer, B. and Kendall, P. (2011). Nutt et al.’s harm scales for drugs: room for improvement but better
policy based on science with limitations than no science at all. Addiction, 106, 1891–1892; discussion
1896–1898.
Gardner, E. (1999). Cannabinoid interaction with brain reward systems. In: G.G. Nahas, K. Sutin, D.
Harvey, and S. Agurell (eds.). Marihuana and Medicine. Towa, NJ: Humana Press, pp. 187–205.
Gerberich, S.G., Sidney, S., Braun, B.L., Tekawa, I.S., Tolan, K.K., and Quesenberry, C.P. (2003).
Marijuana use and injury events resulting in hospitalization. Annals of Epidemiology, 13, 230–237.
Gieringer, D., St Laurent, J., and Goodrich, S. (2004). Cannabis vaporizer combines efficient delivery of
THC with effective suppression of pyrolytic compounds. Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics, 4, 7–27.
Gorman, D.M. (1995). On the difference between statistical and practical significance in school-based drug
abuse prevention. Drugs-Education Prevention and Policy, 2, 275–283.
Gottschalk, L., Aronow, W., and Prakash, R. (1977). Effect of marijuana and placebo-marijuana smoking
on psychological state and on psychophysiological and cardiovascular functioning in angina patients.
Biological Psychiatry, 12, 255–266.
Gowing, L.R., Ali, R.L., and White, J.M. (2000). Respiratory Harms of Smoked Cannabis (DASC
Monograph No. 8). Parkside, SA: Drug and Alcohol Services Council South Australia.
Greenwald, G. (2009). Drug Decriminalization in Portugal: Lessons for Creating Fair and Successful Drug
Policies. Washington, DC: Cato Institute.
Grier, S. and Bryant, C.A. (2005). Social marketing in public health. Annual Review of Public Health, 26,
319–339.
Grotenhermen, F. (2004). Cannabinoids for therapeutic use: Designing systems to increase efficacy and
reliability. American Journal of Drug Delivery, 2, 229–240.
Grotenhermen, F., Leson, G., Berghaus, G., et al. (2007). Developing limits for driving under cannabis.
Addiction, 102, 1910–1917.
Hall, W.D. (1995). The public health significance of cannabis use in Australia. Australian Journal of Public
Health, 19, 235–242.
Hall, W.D. and Degenhardt, L. (2009). The adverse health effects of nonmedical cannabis use. Lancet, 374,
1383–1391.
Hall, W.D., Degenhardt, L., and Patton, G.C. (2008). Cannabis abuse and dependence. In: C.A. Essau (ed.).
Adolescent Addiction: Epidemiology, Treatment and Assessment. London: Academic Press, pp. 117–148.
Hall, W.D. and Lynskey, M.T. (2005). Is cannabis a gateway drug? Testing hypotheses about the relationship between cannabis use and the use of other illicit drugs. Drug and Alcohol Review, 24, 39–48.
Hall, W.D. and Pacula, R.L. (2010). Cannabis Use and Dependence: Public Health and Public Policy (reissue
of 2003 1st ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, W.D. and Swift, W. (2000). The THC content of cannabis in Australia: evidence and implications.
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 24, 503–508.

705

706

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Hall, W.D. and Swift, W. (2006). The policy implications of cannabis dependence. In: R.A. Roffman
and R.S. Stephens (eds.), Cannabis Dependence: Its Nature, Consequences and Treatment. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 315–339.
Hashibe, M., Morgenstern, H., Cui, Y., et al. (2006). Marijuana use and the risk of lung and upper aerodigestive tract cancers: Results of a population-based case-control study. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers
and Prevention, 15, 1829–1834.
Hashibe, M., Straif, K., Tashkin, D.P., Morgenstern, H., Greenland, S., and Zhang, Z.F. (2005).
Epidemiologic review of marijuana use and cancer risk. Alcohol, 35, 265–275.
Hazekamp, A., Ruhaak, R., Zuurman, L., van Gerven, J., and Verpoorte, R. (2006). Evaluation of a
vaporizing device (Volcano) for the pulmonary administration of tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 95, 1308–1317.
Henquet, C., Krabbendam, L., Spauwen, J., et al. (2004). Prospective cohort study of cannabis use, predisposition for psychosis, and psychotic symptoms in young people. British Medical Journal, 330, 11.
Henstridge, J., Homel, R., and Mackay, P. (1997). The Long-Term Effects of Random Breath Testing in Four
Australian States: A Time Series Analysis. Canberra: Federal Office of Road Safety.
Hickman, M., Vickerman, P., Macleod, J., Kirkbride, J., and Jones, P.B. (2007). Cannabis and schizophrenia: model projections of the impact of the rise in cannabis use on historical and future trends in schizophrenia in England and Wales. Addiction, 102, 597–606.
Homel, R. (1988). Policing and Punishing the Drinking Driver: A Study of General and Specific Deterrence.
New York: Springer.
Horwood, L.J., Fergusson, D.M., Hayatbakhsh, M.R., et al. (2010). Cannabis use and educational achievement: findings from three Australasian cohort studies. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 110, 247–253.
Howden, M.L. and Naughton, M.T. (2011). Pulmonary effects of marijuana inhalation. Expert Reviews, 5,
87–92.
IHRA. (2010). What is Harm Reduction? A Position Statement from the International Harm Reduction
Association (IHRA Briefing). London: IHRA.
Iversen, L. (2007). The Science of Marijuana. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jeffery, D., Ley, A., McLaren, S., and Siegfried, N. (2004). Psychosocial treatment programmes for people
with both severe mental illness and substance misuse. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2000,
Issue 2.
Jones, R.T. (2002). Cardiovascular system effects of marijuana. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 42,
58S–63S.
Kandel, D.B. (2002). Stages and Pathways of Drug Involvement: Examining the Gateway Hypothesis. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Kavanagh, D.J. (1995). An intervention for substance abuse in schizophrenia. Behaviour Change, 12, 20–30.
Lacey, J., Brainard, K., and Snitow, S. (2010). Drug Per Se Laws: Review of Their Use in States. (DOT HS).
Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Department of Transportation.
Laumon, B., Gadegbeku, B., Martin, J.L., and Biecheler, M.B. (2005). Cannabis intoxication and fatal road
crashes in France: population based case-control study. British Medical Journal, 331, 1371.
Lee, M.H.S. and Hancox, R.J. (2011). Effects of smoking cannabis on lung function. Expert Reviews, 5,
537–546.
Lehman, A.F., Herron, J.D., Schwartz, R.P., and Myers, C.P. (1993). Rehabilitation for adults with severe
mental illness and substance use disorders: a clinical trial. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 181,
86–90.
Lenton, S. (2000). Cannabis policy and the burden of proof: is it now beyond reasonable doubt that cannabis prohibition is not working? Drug and Alcohol Review, 19, 95–100.
Lenton, S., Bennett, M., and Heale, P. (1999a). The Social Impact of a Minor Cannabis Offence Under Strict
Prohibition: The Case of Western Australia. Perth: National Centre for Research into the Prevention of
Drug Abuse.

Harm Reduction Policies for Cannabis

Lenton, S., Christie, P., Humeniuk, R., Brooks, A., Bennet, M., and Heale, P. (1999b). Infringement versus
Conviction: The Social Impact of a Minor Cannabis Offence Under a Civil Penalties System and Strict
Prohibition in two Australian States (Vol. 36). Canberra: Commonwealth Department of Health and
Aged Care.
Lenton, S. and Single, E. (1998). The definition of harm reduction. Drug and Alcohol Review, 17, 213–219.
Lessem, J.M., Hopfer, C.J., Haberstick, B.C., et al. (2006). Relationship between adolescent marijuana use
and young adult illicit drug use. Behavior Genetics, 36, 498–506.
Lynskey, M.T. and Hall, W.D. (2000). The effects of adolescent cannabis use on educational attainment: a
review. Addiction, 96, 433–443.
Lynskey, M.T., Heath, A.C., Bucholz, K.K., and Slutske, W.S. (2003). Escalation of drug use in early-onset
cannabis users vs co-twin controls. JAMA, 289, 427–433.
Macleod, J., Oakes, R., Copello, A., et al. (2004). Psychological and social sequelae of cannabis and other
illicit drug use by young people: A systematic review of longitudinal, general population studies. Lancet,
363, 1579–1588.
Manzanares, J., Corchero, J., Romero, J., Fernandez-Ruiz, J.J., Ramos, J.A., and Fuentes, J.A. (1999).
Pharmacological and biochemical interactions between opioids and cannabinoids. Trends in
Pharmacological Sciences, 20, 287–294.
Martin, G. and Copeland, J. (2008). The adolescent cannabis check-up: randomized trial of a brief intervention for young cannabis users. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 34, 407–414.
McLaren, J., Swift, W., Dillon, P., and Allsop, S. (2008). Cannabis potency and contamination: A review of
the literature. Addiction, 103, 1100–1109.
Mehra, R., Moore, B.A., Crothers, K., Tetrault, J., and Fiellin, D.A. (2006). The association between marijuana smoking and lung cancer: a systematic review. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166, 1359–1367.
Meier, M.H., Caspi, A., Ambler, A., et al. (2012). Persistent cannabis users show neuropsychological
decline from childhood to midlife. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 109, E2657–E2664.
Melamede, R. (2005). Harm reduction: the cannabis paradox. Harm Reduction Journal, 2, 17.
Miller, W.R. and Sovereign, R.G. (1989). The check-up: A model for early intervention in addictive behaviors. In: T. Leberg, W. Miller, G. Nathan, and G. Marlatt (eds.). Addictive Behaviors: Prevention and Early
Intervention. Amsterdam: Swets and Zeitlinger, pp. 219–231.
Mittleman, M.A., Lewis, R.A., Maclure, M., Sherwood, J.B., and Muller, J.E. (2001). Triggering myocardial infarction by marijuana. Circulation, 103, 2805–2809.
Moir, D., Rickert, W.S., Levasseur, G., et al. (2008). A comparison of mainstream and sidestream marijuana and tobacco cigarette smoke produced under two machine smoking conditions. Chemical Research in
Toxicology, 21, 494–502.
Moore, T.H., Zammit, S., Lingford-Hughes, A., et al. (2007). Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or affective mental health outcomes: a systematic review. Lancet, 370, 319–328.
Morgan, C.J., Schafer, G., Freeman, T.P., and Curran, H.V. (2010). Impact of cannabidiol on the acute
memory and psychotomimetic effects of smoked cannabis: naturalistic study. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 197, 285–290.
Morral, A.R., McCaffrey, D.F., and Paddock, S.M. (2002). Reassessing the marijuana gateway effect.
Addiction, 97, 1493–1504.
Mueser, K.T., Bellack, A.S., and Blanchard, J.J. (1992). Comorbidity of schizophrenia and substance abuse:
implications for treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 845–856.
Mukamal, K.J., Maclure, M., Muller, J.E., and Mittleman, M.A. (2008). An exploratory prospective study of
marijuana use and mortality following acute myocardial infarction. American Heart Journal, 155, 465–470.
Mura, P., Kintz, P., Ludes, B., et al. (2003). Comparison of the prevalence of alcohol, cannabis and other
drugs between 900 injured drivers and 900 control subjects: results of a French collaborative study.
Forensic Science International, 133, 79–85.

707

708

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Nawrot, T.S., Perez, L., Kunzli, N., Munters, E., and Nemery, B. (2011). Public health importance of triggers of myocardial infarction: a comparative risk assessment. Lancet, 377, 732–740.
Pacula, R.L., Chriqui, J.F., and King, J. (2004). Marijuana Decriminalization: What Does it Mean in the
United States? (Working Paper No. WR-126). Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Patton, G.C., Harris, J.B., Schwartz, M., and Bowes, G. (1997). Adolescent suicidal behaviors: a populationbased study of risk. Psychological Medicine, 27, 715–724.
Ramaekers, J.G., Berghaus, G., van Laar, M., and Drummer, O.H. (2004). Dose related risk of motor vehicle crashes after cannabis use. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 73, 109–119.
Riley, D., Pates, R., Monaghan, G., and O’Hare, P. (2012). A brief history of harm reduction. In: R. Pates
and D. Riley (eds.). Harm Reduction in Substance Use and High Risk Behaviour: International Policy and
Practice. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 5–16.
Robbe, H.W.J. (1994). Influence of Marijuana on Driving. Maastricht: Institute for Human
Psychopharmacology.
Roffman, R.A. and Stephens, R.S. (eds.). (2006). Cannabis Dependence: Its Nature, Consequences and
Treatment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Room, R., Fischer, B., Hall, W.D., Lenton, S., and Reuter, P. (2008). Cannabis Policy: Moving Beyond
Stalemate (Global Cannabis Commission Report). Oxford: Beckley Foundation.
Roxburgh, A., Hall, W.D., Degenhardt, L., McLaren, J., Black, E., Copeland, J., et al. (2010). The epidemiology of cannabis use and cannabis-related harm in Australia 1993-2007. Addiction, 105, 1071–1079.
Saha, S., Chant, D., Welham, J., and McGrath, J. (2005). A systematic review of the prevalence of schizophrenia. PLoS Medicine, 2, e141.
Sanders, M.R. (2012). Development, evaluation, and multinational dissemination of the triple P-Positive
Parenting Program. Annual review of clinical psychology, 8, 345–379.
Shand, F., Gates, J., Fawcett, J., and Mattick, R. (2003). The Treatment of Alcohol Problems: A Review of the
Evidence. Canberra: Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing.
Sidney, S., Quesenberry, C.P., Jr., Friedman, G.D., and Tekawa, I.S. (1997). Marijuana use and cancer
incidence (California, United States). Cancer Causes and Control, 8, 722–728.
Sidney, S. (2002). Cardiovascular consequences of marijuana use. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 42,
64S–70S.
Smiley, A. (1999). Marijuana: on road and driving simulator studies. In: H. Kalant, W. Corrigall, W.D. Hall,
and R. Smart (eds.). The Health Effects of Cannabis. Toronto: Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
pp. 171–191.
Solowij, N. (1998). Cannabis and Cognitive Functioning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Solowij, N., Stephens, R.S., Roffman, R.A., et al. (2002). Cognitive functioning of long-term heavy cannabis users seeking treatment. JAMA, 287, 1123–1131.
Stephens, R.S., Roffman, R.A., Fearer, S.A., Williams, C., and Burke, R.S. (2007). The marijuana checkup: promoting change in ambivalent marijuana users. Addiction, 102, 947–957.
Strang, J. and Farrell, M. (1992). Harm minimisation for drug misusers. British Medical Journal, 304, 1127–1128.
Swift, W., Copeland, J., and Lenton, S. (2000). Cannabis and harm reduction. Drug and Alcohol Review,
19, 101–112.
Tashkin, D.P. (1999). Effects of cannabis on the respiratory system. In: H. Kalant, W. Corrigall, W.D. Hall,
and R. Smart (eds.). The Health Effects of Cannabis. Toronto: Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
pp. 311–345.
Tashkin, D.P. (2005). Smoked marijuana as a cause of lung injury. Monaldi Archives for Chest Disease, 63,
93–100.
Tashkin, D.P., Baldwin, G.C., Sarafian, T., Dubinett, S., and Roth, M.D. (2002). Respiratory and immunologic consequences of marijuana smoking. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 42, 71S–81S.
Taylor, D.R., Fergusson, D.M., Milne, B.J., et al. (2002). A longitudinal study of the effects of tobacco and
cannabis exposure on lung function in young adults. Addiction, 97, 1055–1061.

Harm Reduction Policies for Cannabis

Tetrault, J.M., Crothers, K., Moore, B.A., Mehra, R., Concato, J., and Fiellin, D.A. (2007). Effects of marijuana smoking on pulmonary function and respiratory complications: a systematic review. Archives of
Internal Medicine, 167, 221–228.
Tobler, N.S., Lessard, T., Marshall, D., Ochshorn, P., and Roona, M. (1999). Effectiveness of school-based
drug prevention programs for marijuana use. School Psychology International, 20, 105–137.
UNODC. (2012). World Drug Report 2012. Vienna: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Van Os, J., Bak, M., Hanssen, M., Bijl, R.V., de Graaf, R., and Verdoux, H. (2002). Cannabis use and psychosis: a longitudinal population-based study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 156, 319–327.
Wagner, F.A., and Anthony, J.C. (2002). Into the world of illegal drug use: exposure opportunity and
other mechanisms linking the use of alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, and cocaine. American Journal of
Epidemiology, 155, 918–925.
Watling, C.N., Palk, G.R., Freeman, J.E., and Davey, J.D. (2010). Applying Stafford and Warr’s reconceptualization of deterrence theory to drug driving: can it predict those likely to offend? Accident Analysis
and Prevention, 42, 452–458.
White, D., and Pitts, M. (1998). Educating young people about drugs: a systematic review. Addiction, 93,
1475–1487.
Wodak, A., Reinarman, C., and Cohen, P. (2002). Cannabis control: costs outweigh benefits. BMJ, 324,
105–106.
Zammit, S., Allebeck, P., Andréasson, S., Lundberg, I., and Lewis, G. (2002). Self reported cannabis use
as a risk factor for schizophrenia in Swedish conscripts of 1969: historical cohort study. BMJ, 325,
1199–1201.
Zhang, Z.F., Morgenstern, H., Spitz, M.R., et al. (1999). Marijuana use and increased risk of squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention, 8, 1071–1078.

709

Chapter 40

Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects
and Forensics
Brian F. Thomas, Jenny L. Wiley, Gerald T. Pollard,
and Megan Grabenauer

40.1 Introduction
Cannabinoid designer drugs are defined here as clandestinely synthesized structures that function
as agonists at cannabinoid (CB) receptors and are used to produce marijuana-like intoxication.
Most such drugs are previously known structures or their derivatives, notably those synthesized
by Huffman for research purposes in the past two decades. They are formulated as additives in
smokable herbal mixtures with benign labels such as “incense” and “not for human consumption” but with names and package graphics that leave no doubt of their psychotropic purpose.
Appearing about 2004 and proliferating by 2008 (Seely et al. 2012a), they have been sold under
dozens of product names such as Spice and K2. They are readily available on the Internet and
can still be found in head shops and other convenient outlets. Legal controls are circumvented by
rapid substitution of similar structures not yet controlled. This chapter will summarize the general chemistry, pharmacology, epidemiology, legal status, and methods of detection of cannabinoid
designer drugs, and will suggest possible future developments in their control.

40.2 General chemistry
40.2.1 Analogs of phytocannabinoids in basic research

and medicinal chemistry

Following the chemical isolation of cannabis constituents in the 1940s, a variety of novel cannabinol, cannabidiol, and tetrahydrocannabinol analogs were synthesized and tested. These early
efforts culminated in the discovery of extremely potent and long-acting dimethylheptylpyran
(DMHP) analogs (Adams et al. 1949) which were quite similar in structure to the principal psychoactive component in cannabis, delta-9 (Δ9)-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) (Gaoni and Mechoulam
1964; Wollner et al. 1942), differing only in the position of one double bond (from Δ9–10 in
Δ9-THC to Δ6a–10a in DMHP) and the extension of the 3-pentyl chain to 3-(1,2-­dimethylheptyl)
(Table 40.1). This evolving knowledge culminated in the 1970s with the first synthetic cannabinoid to be approved for oral administration by the FDA, nabilone (Cesamet®), which has both a
1,1,-dimethylheptyl side chain at the 3-position and a 9-keto hexahydrocannabinol ring system
(Table 40.1).
In the 1980s, researchers at Pfizer integrated the available information into a medicinal chemistry campaign to identify and develop cannabinoid-based, nondependence-producing analgesics.
Focusing on the 9-nor-9-OH-hexahydrocannabinol framework described by Wilson and May

Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics

Table 40.1 A selection of cannabinoid receptor agonistsa
Structure

Name
Δ9-THC
OH

O
DMHP

OH

O
O

Nabilone
OH

O
OH

Levonantradol
OH

N
H

O

OH

CP-47,497
OH

OH

Cannabicyclohexanol
(CP-47,497 – C8 analog)

OH

OH

CP-55,940
OH

HO

R

R′

711

712

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Table 40.1 (continued) A selection of cannabinoid receptor agonistsa
Structure

Name

OH

R

R′

WIN 48,098 or Pravadoline

4-MeO-Phenyl

Me

WIN 55,225 or JWH-200

1-Naphthyl

H

JW -018

n-Pentyl

H

JWH-073

n-Butyl

H

CP-55,244
OH

HO
OH

HU-210
OH

O
WIN 55,212-2

O
N

N

O

O
O
R

R'
N

O

N

R'

O

N R

a For a comprehensive list of synthetic cannabinoids as reported by the National Forensic Laboratory Information System

(NFLIS), a Drug Enforcement Administration program that systematically collects drug chemistry analysis results, as well
as other related information, from cases analyzed by state, local and federal forensic laboratories, see https://www.nflis.
deadiversion.usdoj.gov/.

(Wilson et al. 1976) and the 3-position side chain, these investigators proposed a pharmacophore model that led to the identification of an entirely new structural class of potent compounds
(Howlett et al. 1988; Johnson et al. 1981a, 1981b) described as nonclassical cannabinoids, and
to the unequivocal identification of pharmacologically relevant G-protein coupled cannabinoid
receptors in the central nervous system (CNS) (Devane et al. 1988; Herkenham et al. 1990, 1991;
Howlett et al. 1990). At the time of the discovery of the type 1 cannabinoid receptor (CB1) in the
late 1980s, there were two main chemical classes of psychotropic agonists, the “classical” consisting of the ABC-tricyclic dibenzopyrans such as THC and of a variety of synthetic ABC-tricyclic
analogs such as DMHP, nabilone, and desacetyl-levonantradol, and the “nonclassical” such as
CP-47,497, CP-55,940, and CP-55,244 (Table 40.1).

Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics

The availability of high-affinity, high-efficacy, potent ligands facilitated the delineation of
cannabinoid receptors and signal transduction pathways and enabled the development of highthroughput radioligand binding assays for screening. Other chemical classes were soon described,
such as the aminoalkylindoles (e.g., WIN 55,212-2 (Table 40.1) discovered by the Sterling Research
Group (D’Ambra et al. 1992)). The CB1 and CB2 receptors were cloned (Matsuda et al. 1990 and
Munro et al. 1993, respectively), and the first endogenous endocannabinoid agonists, arachidonoyl ethanolamide (anandamide) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), were described (Devane
et al. 1992). The endocannabinoid system was further defined through the discovery of substrate
specific enzymes catalyzing degradation, including fatty acid amide hydrolases, monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL), the serine hydrolases α/β-hydrolase 6 and 12, and N-acylethanolaminehydrolyzing acid amidase (for review, see Feledziak et al. 2012).
The exact nature of the molecular interactions of cannabinoid agonists with receptors remained
unknown, and it was not clear whether all of the various structural classes of agonists, particularly
the aminoalkylindoles and the endocannabinoids, shared structural elements or structure–­activity
relationship (SAR) with classical or nonclassical cannabinoids, or interacted within the same
recognition site. So Dr. John W. Huffman designed and developed the JWH-series of alkylindoles
to test a pharmacophore overlay theory for WIN 55,212-2 and classical cannabinoids. These and
other efforts demonstrated that activity is retained when the aminoalkyl substituent is replaced
by N-alkyl chains (Huffman et al. 1994), and that the indole nucleus can be replaced with other
ring systems including indene (Kumar et al. 1995) and pyrrole (Lainton et al. 1995; Wiley et al.
1998), which led to new agonists with significant selectivity for the CB2 receptor such as JWH015, AM-630 (Pertwee et al. 1995), L-768,242 (also known as GW-405,833) (Gallant et al. 1996),
and BAY 38-7271 (Mauler et al. 2002). In addition, efforts to combine structural elements of fatty
acid ethanolamides with elements derived from olivetol (the biosynthetic precursor of THC in
cannabis) or substituted resorcinol again led to high affinity ligands at CB1 and CB2 (Brizzi et al.
2005, 2009), including CB-25 and CB-52, which are partial agonists at CB1 and neutral antagonists
at CB2 (Cascio et al. 2006).
As additional classes were discovered, the structural requirements for pharmacological affinity,
selectivity, efficacy, and potency were further described, often with a common goal of delineating
mechanisms of action or maximizing desirable therapeutic properties (e.g., analgesia, antiemesis)
while minimizing or eliminating side effects (e.g., lethargy, sedation, psychoactivity). Much of
this information was made publically available through publications or patents, as is typical for
such efforts. This availability facilitates advances in understanding the molecular basis of activity
and enables the translation of research findings into advances in health sciences and therapeutics.
However, it can also be used by people with alternative ideas about how to capitalize on such
findings.
40.2.2 Synthetic cannabinoids for recreational use

In 2004, “herbal products” and “incense” appeared in Europe under a variety of trade names
and were alleged to produce cannabinoid effects. Analysis showed that they were intentionally
adulterated with synthetic agonists. The first reported were the octyl analog of Pfizer’s potent nonclassical cannabinoid CP-47,497 and an alkylindole analog from Huffman’s research, JWH-018
(Auwarter et al. 2009). Unregulated and misleadingly labeled formulations became increasingly
prevalent across the globe. The variety of plant material and the number of synthetics increased at
an alarming rate, such that by the end of 2010 herbal products being openly marketed in stores and
on the Internet commonly included at least one class of synthetic agonist: naphthoylindoles (e.g.,

713

714

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

JWH-018, JWH-073, and JWH-200), naphthylmethylindoles (e.g., JWH-007), naphthoylpyrroles
(e.g., JWH-147), phenylacetylindoles (e.g., JWH-250), cyclohexylphenols (e.g., CP-47,497), and
classical cannabinoids (e.g., HU-210).
The molecules most commonly found in these products were from the published literature.
As regulations progressed, previously undescribed compounds appeared. For example, XLR11, identified in smoking blends in 2012, seems to have been invented by chemical suppliers
specifically for recreational use. It is a simple 5′-fluorinated pentyl side chain derivative of 3(tetramethylcyclopropylmethanoyl)indole compounds such as UR-144, A-796,260, and
A-834,735; but it is not listed in the patent or the scientific literature alongside these compounds
(Frost et al. 2010), and appears to have not previously been made by Abbott Laboratories, despite
falling within the claims of patent WO 2006/069196. While often not fully disclosing active ingredients, product packaging may state that the material does not contain any US Drug Enforcement
Agency (DEA) banned substances, or that it is legal in particular states.
As further regulations and enforcement actions take effect, manufacturers are forced to identify
alternative molecules or structural classes. As a result, an increasing variety of unusual chemicals and unproven pharmacological approaches have been reported. Oleamide, for example, is
an endocannabinoid-like molecule that binds to and modulates cannabinoid receptors and has
been detected in herbal products. It induces sleep and, like anandamide, is also involved in the
regulation of memory processes, body temperature, and locomotor activity. However, intuitively
this compound’s low volatility makes smoking or vaporizing a relatively poor choice for delivery.
Alternative approaches that increase endocannabinoid tone by using chemicals to inhibit the
degradation of endocannabinoids, such as the MAGL inhibitor URB-754 (Makara et al. 2005),
are also appearing (Uchiyama et al. 2012a). However, the ability to increase anandamide or 2-AG
levels and induce psychotomimetic effects in man after inhalation is uncertain, and the dose–
response relationship is not well defined. Indeed, recent studies have shown that URB-754 failed
to inhibit MAGL (Saario et al. 2006), and there is controversy about its pharmacological activity
(Saario et al. 2006; Vandevoorde et al. 2007). Herbal smoking products with no cannabinoid
content and acting through other mechanisms are appearing as well, such as Salvia and kratom.
40.2.3 Perspective

From its beginnings in basic research and therapeutic drug development, chemical synthesis of
cannabinoid ligands has morphed into an illicit enterprise that serves recreational drug users
worldwide while keeping a step ahead of regulations and detection methods, with scant regard for
social and medical consequences.

40.3 General pharmacology and physiology
40.3.1 Mechanism of action

The most common screening strategy for SAR analysis of synthetic cannabinoids has been a twoprong approach of assessment of binding affinity at CB1 and CB2 receptors followed by evaluation in
a tetrad of tests in which cannabinoid agonists produce a characteristic profile of effects in mice: suppression of motor activity, antinociception, hypothermia, and catalepsy (Martin et al. 1991). In these
assays, THC and prototypic synthetic cannabinoid agonists (e.g., WIN 55,212-2, CP-55,940) bind
to CB1 and CB2 and are active in the tetrad battery with potencies that are strongly correlated with
their affinities for CB1 (Compton et al. 1993). While THC and CP-55,940 bind with approximately
equal affinity to both identified cannabinoid receptors (THC: CB1 Ki = 41 nM, CB2 Ki = 36 nM;

Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics

CP-55,940: CB1 Ki = 0.6 nM, CB2 Ki = 0.7 nM), WIN 55,212-2 has better affinity for CB2 (Ki = 0.28
nM) vs. CB1 (Ki = 1.89 nM) (Showalter et al. 1996). The three compounds also differ in their in vitro
efficacy at CB1. Whereas THC acts as a partial agonist in functional assays such as [35S]GTPγS binding, CP-55,940 and WIN 55,212-2 are full agonists (Breivogel and Childers 2000), although all three
compounds show approximately equal efficacy in the mouse tetrad. Uniquely, however, the binding
site of WIN 55,212-2 at the CB1 receptor only partially overlaps that of THC (Song and Bonner
1996). In addition, WIN 55,212-2 possesses effects that are not shared by either THC or CP-55,940
and that are mediated via a non-CB1, non-CB2 mechanism (Breivogel et al. 2001; Hajos et al. 2001;
Monory et al. 2002), suggesting the possibility of other cannabinoid receptors. Because structural
analogs of THC have long been illegal (e.g., due to analog provisions of DEA regulations), most of
the novel synthetic cannabinoids currently being abused are derived from the aminoalkylindole
template, or less commonly are bicyclic analogs related to CP-55,940. Hence, this section focuses
primarily on discussion of the SAR of indole-derived structures.
Indole-derived cannabinoids were originally developed as research tools designed to probe the
structural properties of CB1 and CB2 receptors. Despite the good CB2 affinity shared by many of
the abused cannabinoids, the primary mechanism of action for their marijuana-like CNS effects
appears to be activation of CB1. Notably, however, this hypothesis has not been confirmed for all
structural templates. Many of the hundreds of synthetic cannabinoids synthesized for research
were evaluated in binding assays (Aung et al. 2000; Huffman et al. 2003, 2005b, 2006, 2008, 2010;
Lainton et al. 1995) but were never tested in animals before they were discovered in products
confiscated from human users. Nevertheless, for the compounds that have been tested in vivo,
CB1 affinity was highly associated with potency for producing each pharmacological effect in the
mouse tetrad (Wiley et al. 1998, 2012a, 2012b) and for eliciting THC-like discriminative stimulus
effects (see section 40.3.3). Further, the CB1 antagonist rimonabant, but not the CB2 antagonist
SR 144528, reversed agonist-induced effects in the tetrad (Wiley et al. 2002). Like WIN 55,212-2,
indole-derived cannabinoids are full agonists at CB1 in vitro, although only a few compounds
have been assessed (Atwood et al. 2010, 2011; Huffman et al. 2005a). Of importance to the current
legal and forensic issues associated with synthetic cannabinoid abuse is the observation that good
CB1 affinity is retained across a wide array of structural manipulations (reviewed in Huffman
and Padgett 2005; Manera et al. 2008). The excellent CB1 affinity of several compounds that have
been detected in street samples (e.g., Ki = 9 nM for JWH-018 and JWH-073) (Wiley et al. 1998)
suggests that these compounds would be more potent than THC, which may account for anecdotal reports that the high they produce is more intense. The affinities of abused cannabinoids
for novel cannabinoid or noncannabinoid receptors and the role that these receptors may play in
mediating or modulating their pharmacological effects are largely unknown. Conceivably, some
of the peripheral effects could be mediated via activation of CB 2, as CB2-selective analogs have
shown anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive activity (Arevalo-Martin et al. 2003; Lombard
et al. 2007).
40.3.2 Pharmacokinetics

Systematic studies examining pharmacokinetics of synthetic cannabinoids have not been performed, primarily due to the vast array of compounds. However, several key points can be derived
from extant data. First, the compounds are lipophilic. Consequently, absorption readily occurs
via injection (intravenous, intraperitoneal, subcutaneous), as indicated by CNS-mediated activity
following each route of administration (Vann et al. 2009; Wiley et al. 1998). Further, distribution
of significant concentrations of JWH-018 to the brain and to most organs and tissues was reported

715

716

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

up to 60 min after pyrolysis and inhalation (Wiebelhaus et al. 2012). Ex vivo autoradiography
with the indole-derived psychoactive cannabinoid [131I]AM-2233 verifies that distribution within
the brain is consistent with localization of CB1 receptors and is rimonabant reversible (Dhawan
et al. 2006). Beyond these two studies, however, the majority of pharmacokinetic work has
focused on identification of urinary metabolites that can be used as forensic markers (see section
40.5.2). Similar to THC, Phase 1 metabolism of synthetics is accomplished by cytochrome P450
(Chimalakonda et al. 2012). Whereas THC has one major psychoactive metabolite (11-OH-THC)
(Huestis et al. 1992), metabolism of synthetic cannabinoids can proceed via several pathways (e.g.,
hydroxylation, glucuronidation), resulting in several metabolites, some of which retain in vivo
and in vitro activity as CB1 agonists or antagonists (Brents et al. 2011, 2012; Chimalakonda et al.
2011a, 2011b; Seely et al. 2012b). Primary elimination is assumed to be through the urine (Moran
et al. 2011; Sobolevsky et al. 2010).
40.3.3 Preclinical pharmacology

The preclinical pharmacology of indole-derived synthetic cannabinoids is poorly characterized. Besides the handful of studies in the mouse tetrad (see section 40.3.1), a few others have
examined their effects in a THC drug discrimination assay, a pharmacologically selective animal
model of marijuana intoxication (Balster and Prescott 1992). In this procedure, animals learn to
use interoceptive cues produced by THC to discriminate which of two levers to press to receive a
food reward (e.g., if THC injection was received, press right lever, and if not THC, press left lever).
Once the animals are trained in this task, compounds other than THC are injected to determine
whether they are “THC-like.” CP-55,940 and WIN 55,212-2 dose-dependently substitute for THC
in rats, monkeys, and mice (McMahon et al. 2008; Wiley 1999). Replacement of the morpholinoethyl group of WIN 55,212-2 with a carbon chain of varying length from butyl to hexyl resulted
in compounds that dose-dependently substituted in THC-trained rats and rhesus monkeys at
potencies consistent with their CB1 affinity, whereas the heptyl compound did not substitute, nor
did it bind to CB1 (Wiley et al. 1998). Later studies showed that JWH-018, JWH-073, AM-2233,
and AM-5983 also substituted for THC in rats and/or rhesus monkeys (Ginsburg et al. 2012; Järbe
et al. 2010, 2011). Rank order potencies were consistent with CB1 affinities, and the substitution
dose-effect curves were shifted to the right by rimonabant, suggesting CB1 mediation. Duration of
action appeared to be shorter than that of THC, particularly for JWH-073 (Ginsburg et al. 2012).
WIN 55,212-2 and JWH-018 also substituted in rats trained to discriminate methanandamide
from vehicle (Järbe et al. 2010). In THC-trained mice, two phenylacetylindoles (JWH-204 and
JWH-205) with good CB1 affinity substituted, whereas another phenylacetylindole (JWH-202)
with poor CB1 affinity did not (Vann et al. 2009).
As described in the preceding paragraph, sparse (but increasing) research attention has been
focused on the effects of acute treatment with indole-derived cannabinoids. Although studies investigating the effects of repeated dosing are lacking, cross-tolerance of three compounds
(CP-55,940, JWH-018, and JWH-073) has been examined in rhesus monkeys chronically treated
with THC in the context of a THC discrimination procedure (Hruba et al. 2012). Monkeys exhibited ninefold tolerance to THC, but only three- to sixfold cross-tolerance when injected with one
of the synthetics. Further, the duration of cross-tolerance was shorter than for THC. A possible
translational implication is that experienced cannabis users may show more sensitivity (i.e., less
cross-tolerance) to synthetics than might be expected based upon their tolerance to THC. On the
other hand, JWH-018 and JWH-073 have also been shown to reverse rimonabant-induced withdrawal in THC-dependent monkeys in a rimonabant discrimination procedure (Ginsburg et al.

Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics

2012). Together, these results suggest that the effects of synthetic cannabinoid use may differ in
cannabis users and nonusers.
40.3.4 Toxicology

Aside from the preclinical pharmacological data cited earlier and the clinical data cited in later
sections, only two published toxicological reports were found. WIN 55,212-2 at 2 mg/kg twice
daily for 21 days produced morphological changes in the hippocampus in rats, including reduction of dendrites in CA1, a structure involved in learning and memory (Lawston et al. 2000).
CP-55,940, CP-47,497, and CP-47,497-C8 produced concentration-dependent cytotoxicity in the
NG 108-15 (neuroblastoma-glioma hybrid) cell line; administration of a CB1 or a CB2 antagonist
showed that the effect was CB1 mediated (Tomiyama and Funada 2011). One other report demonstrated that CP-47,497 and JWH-018 induced more profound changes in electroencephalogram
patterns in rats than did THC (Uchiyama et al. 2012b).
40.3.5 Perspective

The weight of the evidence suggests CB1 agonism as the proximate mechanism by which synthetic cannabinoids produce their effects. Limited data show that indole-derived cannabinoids
have pharmacological effects similar to those of THC; however, few studies have examined their
effects in behavioral assays that are not selective for CB1 agonists. Many of these compounds bind
to CB2 receptors and may have activity at noncannabinoid receptors, suggesting an avenue for
future research.

40.4 Abuse and control
40.4.1 Prevalence

The published evidence is primarily from three types of sources: surveys, medical reports, and
monitoring of drug chat rooms and other Internet sites. Each has its limitations.
◆

◆

◆

◆

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2011) reported a pilot study which found that
“about 6% of pupils in Frankfurt, Germany, aged between 15 and 18 had used ‘Spice’ products
at least once by the end of 2008.”
The U.S. National Forensic Laboratory Information System reported an increase in cases of
synthetic cannabinoids submitted to state and local forensic laboratories from 13 to 2977
between 2009 to 2010 (US Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration 2011).
The European Monitoring Center for Drugs and Drug Addiction (2012) Europol 2011 Annual
Report concluded from “representative studies” that “prevalence levels are not substantial
but there is a potential for rapid rise of use in certain sub-populations.” The Center monitors
the Internet with “snapshots” of limited scope and duration. Among its findings: online drug
shops offering at least one psychoactive substance increased from 170 in January 2010 to 690
in January 2012; 23 new cannabinoids were reported by the European Union Early Warning
System in 2011, at least two of which were derivatives of JWH compounds, not the compounds
themselves; incidence of synthetic cannabinoid use from surveys, while quite variable, is typically in the single digits; “the extent to which these products are used is largely unknown.”
Of 20 Idaho hospitals surveyed, 11 had knowledge of Spice and more than 80 cases of suspected overdose occurred between February and August 2010 (Hurst 2010).

717

718

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

An anonymous Internet survey of 391 persons identified online as users of synthetic cannabinoids in 42 US states and 12 other countries produced the following demographics: 83%
were male, 90% were Caucasian, 47% were employed full time, and 48% had college degrees
(Vandrey et al. 2012).
University of Florida students were surveyed by email in September 2010 about “spice,” “K2,”
and “legal weed.” Of 852 who responded, 8% reported ever use (that is, at least once), which
was “higher than ever use of many other drugs of abuse that are commonly monitored in adolescents and young adults” (Hu et al. 2011).
The six centers of the Texas Poison Center Network, serving a state population of 25 million,
reported three calls about synthetic cannabinoids in 2008, nine in 2009, and 572 in 2010
(Forrester et al. 2011).
The American Association of Poison Control Centers (2012) reported the following numbers
for “closed human exposure calls to poison centers” about synthetic cannabinoids: 53 in 2009
(cited by Hu et al. 2011), 2906 in 2010, 6959 in 2011, and 4710 in the first 10 months of 2012.
Of 14,966 participants in a global Internet survey in late 2011, 17% reported ever use of synthetics. They showed “a strong preference for natural over synthetic cannabis”—a more pleasant high and fewer negative effects (Winstock and Barratt 2013).

“The at-risk demographics are difficult to identify, as this ‘virtual’ community of drug users is
generally discovered only when adverse effects compel individuals to seek care from emergency
departments and poison control centers” (Rosenbaum et al. 2012).
40.4.2 Adverse effects

Smokers of Spice typically report a cannabis-like high. Reasons cited for preference over herbal
cannabis include legality, non-detectability by conventional screens such as urinalysis, ease of
access on the Internet, in some cases superiority of subjective effects, and a perception of safety
(Fattore and Fratta 2011). The literature is replete with evidence contrary to that perception. Effects
include agitation, anxiety, bradycardia, cardiotoxicity, confusion, chest pain, dizziness, drowsiness, hallucinations, hypertension, irritability, memory deficits, nausea, sedation, seizures, tachycardia, vomiting, and withdrawal symptoms (Fattore and Fratta 2011; Hoyte et al. 2012; Table 1
of Seely et al. 2012a).
The most common serious complaint in surveys and case reports is tachycardia, cited in 40%
of the 1353 single-agent exposures reported to the National Poison Data System of the US in the
first 9 months of 2010 (Hoyte et al. 2012). Cardiovascular effects may extend to hypertension
(e.g., Schneir and Baumbacher 2012) and myocardial infarction (in three 16-year-old boys after
smoking K2) (Mir et al. 2011).
The incidence of psychotic symptoms is high enough to be of concern. In the National Poison
Data System report, it was 9.4% (Hoyte et al. 2012). Cannabis smoking has long been associated
with schizophrenia, though cause and effect have not been established (Fattore and Fratta 2011).
Synthetic cannabinoids have been implicated in relapse (69% of 15 patients) (Every-Palmer 2011)
and with induction of symptoms in persons with no clinical history (Bebarta et al. 2012; Benford
and Caplan 2011). Of ten patients admitted to a US Navy hospital with a history of smoking synthetic cannabinoids, a diagnosis of psychosis, and no prior history of psychosis, symptoms resolved
within 8 days for seven but persisted more than 5 months in the other three (Hurst et al. 2011).
Seizure seems to be rare (3.8% of the cases in Hoyte et al. (2012)) but appears in several reports
(Simmons et al. (2011) and Schneir and Baumbacher (2012) from smoking; Lapoint et al. (2011)

Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics

from ingestion of powder). “The absence of anticonvulsant phytocannabinoids in spice products
could potentially be one of the multiple unknown mechanisms contributing to convulsions”
(Schneir and Baumbacher 2012).
Survey and case report information on long-term use is meager. Usage by the 10 patients with
acute psychosis cited earlier (Hurst et al. 2011) ranged from four times over 3 weeks to daily for
1.5 years. In a group of 11 teenagers with variable durations of use at an addiction treatment center (36% used the drugs multiple times a day), all reported memory changes and 35% reported
paranoid thoughts (Castellanos et al. 2011). Craving and other withdrawal signs were reported in
a patient who had used daily for 8 months (Zimmerman et al. 2009; this patient had a complex
medical history). Because these products come in multiple forms with various ingredients, and
many or most subjects may use other potentially toxic substances, isolating the chronic effects of
a single structure or class of structures will require a massive database.
Of the few deaths reported in connection with synthetic cannabinoids, none was unequivocally
ascribed to direct toxicity. The immediate cause in one case was coronary ischemia and in another
was suicide. The nine fatalities in Europe cited by Fattore and Fratta (2011) in the context of “a
Spice-like blend called ‘Krypton’” apparently did not involve synthetic cannabinoids (Kronstrand
et al. 2011).
40.4.3 Legal status

The Spice phenomenon developed rapidly and was by nature unusual—legal products sold openly
and claiming to be not for human consumption. Statutes varied in basis and implementation.
Governments required time to formulate policy and enact regulatory measures.
Beginning in 2009, all products containing synthetic cannabinoids were placed under control in
several European countries, making them inaccessible in head shops and, theoretically, on the Internet
(Seely et al. 2012a). By 2011, they were controlled in Austria, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Poland, Romania, Sweden, and the UK (Fattore and
Fratta 2011). They are now controlled in Finland, Russia, and Switzerland (Cox et al. 2012).
The US DEA identifies drugs by chemical structure for scheduling purposes. To get around the
problem that abused synthetic cannabinoids are structurally distinct from THC, in November
2010 the DEA used an emergency edict to place JWH-018, JWH-200, JWH-073, CP-47,497, and
cannabicyclohexanol on Schedule I for 1 year effective March 2011 (Fattore and Fratta 2011).
States began to make their own regulations about this time (Fattore and Fratta 2011; United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2011). Canada and Chile also have instituted controls (Cox
et al. 2012).
In the Asia-Pacific region, five synthetic cannabinoids were controlled under the Japanese
Pharmaceutical Affairs Law in 2010. As in other countries, banned structures were quickly
replaced (Kikura-Hanajiri et al. 2011). In Japan, “it is a very difficult task to change the legal status
of these substances. New compounds cannot be controlled unless the pharmacological activity is
proven. This requires acquisition of reference materials which in turn may slow down the process.
Furthermore, assessing pharmacological activity of every single compound is time‐consuming
and hence hampering initiatives to control these substances” (United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime 2011). In August 2011, the New Zealand Parliament placed a 1-year ban on 16 synthetic cannabinoids found in Spice-like products (Brown 2011). South Korea, too, has instituted
controls (Cox et al. 2012).
The report “Synthetic Cannabinoids in Herbal Products” by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (2011), which covers developments through the end of 2010, states: “None of

719

720

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

the synthetic cannabinoids found so far in ‘Spice’ and ‘Spice’‐like products are internationally
controlled under the 1961 or 1971 UN Drug control conventions.” Despite regulatory action by
individual authorities, cooperative initiatives, and widespread concern (Fattore and Fratta 2011),
access to these products via the Internet poses a daunting challenge.
40.4.4 Perspective

Although prevalence numbers are far from definitive, existing evidence indicates that recreational
use and abuse of synthetic cannabinoids is a significant public health concern. Demand is robust
despite the known dangers, the supply side is nimble, and legislation has been in some cases too
ponderous to cope. The result is a pernicious problem, especially among youth.

40.5 Forensic and analytical chemistry
40.5.1 Identification of product

Synthetic cannabinoids are most often formulated for smoking by addition to non-cannabis
plant material. Damiana (Turnera diffusa), mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris), coltsfoot (Tussilago
farfara), mullein (Verbascum thapsus), and marshmallow (Althaea officinalis) are examples seen
on product packaging. Plant material varies widely between branded products and may vary
within a brand over time and place. The subject has received relatively little attention in the
literature. Synthetics detected by forensic laboratories likewise vary widely by brand, time, and
place. Recently, compounds have become more available as powder, rather than mixed with plant
ma­terial, and so can be taken orally or vaporized for inhalation.
Table 40.2 shows assays used to identify synthetics in seized samples. Thin-layer chromatography (TLC) has long been used to identify phytocannabinoids and synthetics in raw products.
Immunoassays are useful though limited. Assays based on mass spectrometry (MS) have advantages
for both detection in raw product and analysis of parent and metabolites ex vivo (see section 40.5.3).
Many Internet websites (e.g., http://www.erowid.org and http://www.drugs-forum.com)
describe products and their effects and give user-submitted suggestions on optimal dosing. This
information, treated with suitable precautions, can enhance current awareness and guide selection of forensic and analytical research areas.
Table 40.2 Forensic and analytical assays for synthetic cannabinoids
Assay

Type of sample

Can identify

Good fora

Raw product Body fluid

Parent Metabolites Screen Confirm

TLC

✓

✓

Immunoassay

✓

Full scan MS
alone

✓

Full scan GC-MS

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Full scan LC-MS

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

MS/MS

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Notes

✓
✓

✓

✓

Primarily ELISA

✓

Includes DART
and MALDI-TOF

✓

Includes SIM,
SRM, MRM

a A screening assay can identify the likely presence of a compound or a member of a class of compounds. A confirmatory

assay can identify a specific compound in the class.

Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics

40.5.2 Markers of synthetic cannabinoid use

Intact synthetic cannabinoids can be detected post consumption in saliva (Coulter et al. 2011),
blood (Kacinko et al. 2011), and hair (Salomone et al. 2012). While testing hair is of limited use
in emergency and medical situations, it is scientifically interesting and may be useful in longerterm treatment and forensics. An ideal noninvasive test uses urine, but intact parent compounds
of synthetic cannabinoids are not usually found in urine of known users (Moller et al. 2011;
Sobolevsky et al. 2010). Therefore, a system that detects metabolites is desirable. Little is known
about the metabolism of most synthetic cannabinoids. The best studied are those first popularly
abused, notably JWH-018 and related alkylindoles. Their common metabolites are products of
mono-, di-, and tri-hydroxylation, resulting from combinations of hydroxylation on the naphthalene ring, the indole ring, and the N-alkyl group. Other commonly reported metabolic transformations are carboxylation, dealkylation, and dihydrodiol formation (Hutter et al. 2012; Kacinko
et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2006).
One complication in detection of parent or metabolite arises from the usual method of administration, smoking, which produces changes through pyrolysis. For example, the N-alkyl group of
AM-2201 loses a fluorine atom to become JWH-018 and is desaturated, completing its conversion to JWH-022 (Donohue and Steiner 2012), and UR-144 and XLR11 undergo cyclopropyl
rearrangements (Forendex Forum 2012). Additional research in this area is needed to determine
exactly what enters the body in order to know what components are responsible for adverse effects.
40.5.3 Analytical techniques
40.5.3.1 Immunoassay

The first step for many commercial and forensic laboratories is a series of immunoassay screens.
Immunoassays are based on the interaction between an antigen and its antibodies. A sample is
mixed with a solution containing antibodies specific to a particular drug or class of drugs. If the
sample contains that drug, it will react with the antibodies and produce a measurable signal such
as a color change. Such screens are commonplace for most drugs of abuse, but first became widely
available for synthetic cannabinoids only in early 2012 (Logan 2012). They can detect dozens of
synthetic cannabinoids and their metabolites but are not comprehensive for the vast number with
potential for abuse. Therefore, their main weakness is high potential for false negatives.
40.5.3.2 Mass spectrometry

Many laboratories skip immunoassays as problematic and go directly to confirmatory tests using
gas chromatography (GC)-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) or liquid chromatography (LC)-MS.
GC-MS (Dresen et al. 2010; Cox et al. 2012), LC-MS, LC-MS/MS (Dresen et al. 2011; Grabenauer
et al. 2012; Kacinko et al. 2011; Uchiyama et al. 2010), and matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) (Gottardo et al. 2012) assays for synthetic cannabinoids
have been recently published.
The most common MS technique in forensic testing is full scan GC-MS with library matching.
The sample is subjected to electron ionization at 70 eV, creating a characteristic and reproducible
mass spectrum of fragment ions, which is searched against a library of mass spectra of known
compounds. There is no preselection of output, so the procedure is unbiased, but a match can
be made only if the synthetic is already in the library. Library matching is less common with
LC-MS because of non-uniformity in fragmentation patterns between LC-MS instruments,
although some laboratories have created internal libraries for data acquired on the same instrument (Mueller et al. 2005).

721

722

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Higher sensitivity can be attained by targeted MS analyses such as single ion monitoring (SIM),
single reaction monitoring (SRM), and multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). In SIM, the detector of a mass spectrometer is fixed at the specific mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) for the compound of
interest. SRM is similar to SIM in that the instrument detects only a single m/z, but the analysis
is more specific because rather than detecting the parent m/z for a compound, the parent m/z is
isolated then fragmented and a specific fragment ion is detected. MRM combines several parentfragment combinations into a single analysis. While these techniques are more sensitive than full
scan data acquisitions, the trade-off is that data acquisition is biased: the instrument operator
must decide before a sample is run which ions to monitor, and no other data are stored.
As high-resolution MS instruments become affordable, more laboratories are using them. They
are ideal for nontargeted screening and confirmatory testing. TOF and orbitrap instruments are
the most common. Both can collect and store data for all ions in a sample, enabling retrospective
analysis. Data can be compared against a library of molecular weights (Gottardo et al. 2012), but
molecular weight alone is not enough to distinguish between isomers.
Beyond accurate mass information, high-resolution MS can be used with fractional mass filtering (also known as mass defect filtering) to detect both previously reported and new compounds.
The fractional mass of a compound is the difference between its calculated exact mass and the
closest integer value. For example, JWH-018 has a calculated exact mass of 341.1780. The closest
integer value is 341, therefore the fractional mass of JWH-018 is 0.1780. Fractional mass filtering
has been used for years to identify metabolites (Zhu et al. 2006) and has only recently been applied
to detection of synthetic cannabinoids (Grabenauer et al. 2012). This technique capitalizes on the
fact that families of synthetic cannabinoids have similar core structures and therefore similar fractional masses. By searching for all ions with fractional masses close to those of known compounds,
the approach becomes a screening tool. It can be applied to intact parent ions and fragment ions.
40.5.4 Challenges

The number of possible chemical constituents of a Spice sample is enormous. Every step of sample
preparation potentially biases the analysis, so techniques with minimal sample preparation are
advantageous to detect the widest possible array. Solid phase micro extraction (SPME) headspace
sampling GC-MS requires minimal preparation and is effective for rapid analysis of bulk drug
substances and herbal formulations (Cox et al. 2012). Direct analysis in real time (DART) ionization (Musah et al. 2012) has also been successful and requires no sample preparation. Analysis
of bodily fluids such as blood and urine generally requires a more thorough sample cleanup, but
liquid-liquid extraction is sufficient for most applications (Moller et al. 2011; Sobolevsky et al.
2010). For herbal formulations, a simple ethanol or methanol extraction works well (Grabenauer
et al. 2012; Uchiyama et al. 2010).
As one synthetic cannabinoid is banned, suppliers rapidly substitute an analog to evade targeted
detection. Manufacturers of reference standards are quick to synthesize these new entities, but the
process is still too slow. Forensic laboratories must rely on library matches to spectra of independently synthesized material; this is not ideal for casework and goes against the Scientific Working
Group for the Analysis of Seized Drugs guidelines, which require confirmation by comparison
to a concurrently run reference standard. An option is structural elucidation with infrared spectroscopy, MS/MS, or nuclear magnetic resonance analysis, but such a thorough characterization
is very time-consuming. Furthermore, the compounds are usually not in a pure state but are present as mixtures requiring purification before final assay, and there might not be enough sample
present for the analysis. Reference standards for metabolites take even longer to become available,
because metabolic studies must be done to determine what to synthesize as standards.

Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics

Techniques that can unambiguously identify isomers are needed, and that means most likely a
chromatographic separation prior to detection, either by LC-MS, GC-MS, or GC-IR (infrared).
Techniques that can act as broad-spectrum screening tools such as IR or MS using full scan data
acquisition need to be employed more routinely to catch new compounds undetectable by targeted methods. Bench chemists need to be armed with tools for structural elucidation via infrared or MS/MS fragment ion spectra to lessen dependence on commercial suppliers of reference
material.

40.6 Conclusions
This chapter is by no means exhaustive. Designer cannabinoids have been ably reviewed elsewhere (Fattore and Fratta 2011; Seely et al. 2012a). We have tried to provide an overview of the
field as reflected in the literature at the end of 2012. Neurochemically there is general agreement
that, like THC, most of these drugs are agonists at the CB 1 receptor, though the downstream
mechanisms are not well understood. The desired subjective effects are cannabis-like but more
intense. Pharmacological data are sparse; systematic toxicological data, very sparse. Since 2008,
a self-selected group numbering perhaps in the tens of thousands has been conducting what
amounts to an ad hoc, uncontrolled Phase 1 clinical trial. These subjects represent a broad spectrum ranging from hardcore drug abusers to casual experimenters. The data that emerge from
surveys, online chat rooms, hospital emergency rooms, and poison centers suggest that synthetic
cannabinoids are more dangerous than marijuana and might even be lethal in some cases. Legal
controls, where any exist, have limited effect, for three reasons: clandestine chemists can replace
banned structures within weeks, Internet vendors are highly resourceful, and the demand is there.
Methods of detection are improving, though the cost is still too great for widespread deployment
where rapid results are needed, as in medical and enforcement settings. Thus, presently the trajectory of designer cannabinoid use seems to be continuing upward.

References
Adams, R., Harfenist, M., and Loewe, S. (1949). New analogs of tetrahydrocannabinol. XIX. Journal of the
American Chemical Society, 71, 1624–1628.
American Association of Poison Control Centers (2012). Synthetic Marijuana Data. [Online] Available at:
http://www.aapcc.org/dnn/Portals/0/Synthetic%20Marijuana%20Data%20for%20Website%2012.12.2011.
pdf (accessed January 16, 2013).
Arevalo-Martin, A., Vela, J.M., Molina-Holgado, E., Borrell, J., and Guaza, C. (2003). Therapeutic action
of cannabinoids in a murine model of multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 2511–2516.
Atwood, B.K., Huffman, J., Straiker, A., and Mackie, K. (2010). JWH018, a common constituent of
‘Spice’ herbal blends, is a potent and efficacious cannabinoid CB receptor agonist. British Journal of
Pharmacology, 160, 585–593.
Atwood, B.K., Lee, D., Straiker, A., Widlanski, T.S., and Mackie, K. (2011). CP47,497-C8 and JWH073,
commonly found in ‘Spice’ herbal blends, are potent and efficacious CB1 cannabinoid receptor agonists.
European Journal of Pharmacology, 659, 139–145.
Aung, M.M., Griffin, G., Huffman, J.W., et al. (2000). Influence of the N-1 alkyl chain length of cannabimimetic indoles upon CB1 and CB2 receptor binding. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 60, 133–140.
Auwarter, V., Dresen, S., Weinmann, W., Muller, M., Putz, M., and Ferreiros, N. (2009). ‘Spice’ and
other herbal blends: harmless incense or cannabinoid designer drugs? Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 44,
832–837.
Balster, R.L. and Prescott, W.R. (1992). ∆9-Tetrahydrocannabinol discrimination in rats as a model for
cannabis intoxication. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 16, 55–62.

723

724

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Bebarta, V.S., Ramirez, S., and Varney, S.M. (2012). Spice: a new “legal” herbal mixture abused by young
active duty military personnel. Substance Abuse, 33, 191–194.
Benford, D.M. and Caplan, J.P. (2011). Psychiatric sequelae of Spice, K2, and synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists. Psychosomatics, 52, 295.
Breivogel, C.S. and Childers, S.R. (2000). Cannabinoid agonist signal transduction in rat brain: comparison of cannabinoid agonists in receptor binding, G-protein activation, and adenylyl cyclase inhibition.
Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 295, 328–336.
Breivogel, C.S., Griffin, G., Di Marzo, V., and Martin, B.R. (2001). Evidence for a new G protein-coupled
cannabinoid receptor in mouse brain. Molecular Pharmacology, 60, 155–163.
Brents, L.K., Reichard, E.E., Zimmerman, S.M., Moran, J.H., Fantegrossi, W.E., and Prather, P.L. (2011).
Phase I hydroxylated metabolites of the K2 synthetic cannabinoid JWH-018 retain in vitro and in vivo
cannabinoid 1 receptor affinity and activity. PLoS One, 6, e21917.
Brizzi, A., Brizzi, V., Cascio, M.G., Bisogno, T., Sirianni, R. and Di Marzo, V. (2005). Design, synthesis,
and binding studies of new potent ligands of cannabinoid receptors. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 48,
7343–7350.
Brizzi, A., Brizzi, V., Cascio, M. G., et al. (2009). New resorcinol−anandamide “hybrids” as potent cannabinoid receptor ligands endowed with antinociceptive activity in vivo. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry,
52, 2506–2514.
Brown, K. (2011). New Zealand bans synthetic cannabinoids. BMJ, 343, d5395.
Cascio, M.G., Bisogno, T., Palazzo, E., et al. (2006). In vitro and in vivo pharmacology of synthetic olivetolor resorcinol-derived cannabinoid receptor ligands. British Journal of Pharmacology, 149, 431–440.
Castellanos, D., Singh, S., Thornton, G., Avila, M., and Moreno, A. (2011). Synthetic cannabinoid use: a
case series of adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health, 49, 347–349.
Chimalakonda, K.C., Bratton, S.M., Le, V.H., et al. (2011a). Conjugation of synthetic cannabinoids
JWH-018 and JWH-073, metabolites by human UDP-glucuronosyltransferases. Drug Metabolism and
Disposition, 39, 1967–1976.
Chimalakonda, K.C., Moran, C.L., Kennedy, P.D., et al. (2011b). Solid-phase extraction and quantitative
measurement of omega and omega-1 metabolites of JWH-018 and JWH-073 in human urine. Analytical
Chemistry, 83, 6381–6388.
Chimalakonda, K.C., Seely, K.A., Bratton, S.M., et al. (2012). Cytochrome P450-mediated oxidative
metabolism of abused synthetic cannabinoids found in K2/Spice: identification of novel cannabinoid
receptor ligands. Drug Metabolism and Disposition, 40, 2174–2184.
Compton, D.R., Rice, K.C., De Costa, B.R., et al. (1993). Cannabinoid structure-activity relationships:
correlation of receptor binding and in vivo activities. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, 265, 218–226.
Coulter, C., Garnier, M., and Moore, C. (2011). Synthetic cannabinoids in oral fluid. Journal of Analytical
Toxicology, 35, 424–430.
Cox, A.O., Daw, R.C., Mason, M.D., et al. (2012). Use of SPME-HS-GC-MS for the analysis of herbal
products containing synthetic cannabinoids. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 36, 293–302.
D’Ambra, T.E., Estep, K.G., Bell, M.R., et al. (1992). Conformationally restrained analogues of pravadoline: nanomolar potent, enantioselective, (aminoalkyl)indole agonists of the cannabinoid receptor.
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 35, 124–135.
Devane, W.A., Dysarz, F.A. 3rd, Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S., and Howlett, A.C. (1988). Determination
and characterization of a cannabinoid receptor in rat brain. Molecular Pharmacology, 34, 605–613.
Devane, W.A., Hanus, L., Breuer, A., et al. (1992). Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds
to the cannabinoid receptor. Science, 258, 1946–1949.
Dhawan, J., Deng, H., Gatley, S.J., et al. (2006). Evaluation of the in vivo receptor occupancy for the behavioral effects of cannabinoids using a radiolabeled cannabinoid receptor agonist, R-[125/131I]AM2233.
Synapse, 60, 93–101.

Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics

Donohue, K.M. and Steiner, R.R. (2012). JWH-018 and JWH-022 as combustion products of AM-2201.
Microgram Journal, 9, 52–56.
Dresen, S., Ferreiros, N., Putz, M., Westphal, F., Zimmermann, R., and Auwarter, V. (2010). Monitoring
of herbal mixtures potentially containing synthetic cannabinoids as psychoactive compounds. Journal of
Mass Spectrometry, 45, 1186–1194.
Dresen, S., Kneisel, S., Weinmann, W., Zimmermann, R., and Auwarter, V. (2011). Development and
validation of a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method for the quantitation of synthetic cannabinoids of the aminoalkylindole type and methanandamide in serum and its application to
forensic samples. Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 46, 163–171.
European Monitoring Center for Drugs and Drug Addiction. (2012). EMCDDA–Europol 2011 Annual
Report on the implementation of Council Decision 2005/387/JHA. [Online] Available at: http://www.
emcdda.europa.eu/publications/implementation-reports/2011.
Every-Palmer, S. (2011). Synthetic cannabinoid JWH-018 and psychosis: an explorative study. Drug and
Alcohol Dependence, 117, 152–157.
Fattore, L. and Fratta, W. (2011). Beyond THC: the new generation of cannabinoid designer drugs.
Frontiers in Behavioural Neuroscience, 5, 60.
Feledziak, M., Lambert, D.M., Marchand-Brynaert, J., and Muccioli, G.G. (2012). Inhibitors of the
endocannabinoid-­degrading enzymes, or how to increase endocannabinoid’s activity by preventing their
hydrolysis. Recent Patents on CNS Drug Discovery, 7, 49–70.
Forendex Forum. (2012). Discussion Board for Forensic Chemists. [Online] Available at: http://forendexforum.
southernforensic.org/viewtopic.php?f=4&t=86&hilit=144&start=10#p650 (accessed November 20, 2012).
Forrester, M.B., Kleinschmidt, K., Schwarz, E., and Young, A. (2011). Synthetic cannabinoid exposures
reported to Texas poison centers. Journal of Addictive Diseases, 30, 351–358.
Frost, J.M., Dart, M.J., Tietje, K.R., et al. (2010). Indol-3-ylcycloalkyl ketones: effects of N1 substituted
indole side chain variations on CB2 cannabinoid receptor activity. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 53,
295–315.
Gallant, M., Dufresne, C., Gareau, Y., et al. (1996). New class of potent ligands for the human peripheral
cannabinoid receptor. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 6, 2263–2268.
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964). Isolation, structure, and partial synthesis of an active constituent of
hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86, 1646–1647.
Ginsburg, B.C., Schulze, D.R., Hruba, L., and McMahon, L.R. (2012). JWH-018 and JWH-073: Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol-like discriminative stimulus effects in monkeys. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 340, 37–45.
Gottardo, R., Chiarini, A., Dal Pra, I., et al. (2012). Direct screening of herbal blends for new synthetic
cannabinoids by MALDI-TOF MS. Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 47, 141–146.
Grabenauer, M., Krol, W.L., Wiley, J.L., and Thomas, B.F. (2012). Analysis of synthetic cannabinoids
using high-resolution mass spectrometry and mass defect filtering: Implications for non-targeted
screening of designer drugs. Analytical Chemistry, 84, 5574–5581.
Hajos, N., Ledent, C., and Freund, T.F. (2001). Novel cannabinoid-sensitive receptor mediates inhibition
of glutamatergic synaptic transmission in the hippocampus. Neuroscience, 106, 1–4.
Herkenham, M., Lynn, A.B., Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S., de Costa, B.R., and Rice, K.C. (1991).
Characterization and localization of cannabinoid receptors in rat brain: a quantitative in vitro autoradiographic study. Journal of Neuroscience, 11, 563–583.
Herkenham, M., Lynn, A.B., Little, M.D., Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S., de Costa, B.R. and Rice, K.C.
(1990). Cannabinoid receptor localization in brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 87, 1932–1936.
Howlett, A.C., Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S., and Milne, G.M. (1988). Nonclassical cannabinoid analgetics
inhibit adenylate cyclase: development of a cannabinoid receptor model. Molecular Pharmacology, 33,
297–302.

725

726

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Howlett, A.C., Bidaut-Russell, M., Devane, W.A., Melvin, L.S., Johnson, M.R., and Herkenham, M.
(1990). The cannabinoid receptor: biochemical, anatomical and behavioral characterization. Trends in
Neurosciences, 13, 420–423.
Hoyte, C.O., Jacob, J., Monte, A.A., Al-Jumaan, M., Bronstein, A.C., and Heard, K.J. (2012). A characterization of synthetic cannabinoid exposures reported to the national poison data system in 2010. Annals
of Emergency Medicine, 60, 435–438.
Hruba, L., Ginsburg, B., and McMahon, L.R. (2012). Apparent inverse relationship between cannabinoid
agonist efficacy and tolerance/cross-tolerance produced by Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol treatment in rhesus monkeys. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 342, 843–849.
Hu, X., Primack, B.A., Barnett, T.E., and Cook, R.L. (2011). College students and use of K2: an emerging
drug of abuse in young persons. Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy, 6, 16.
Huestis, M.A., Henningfield, J.E., and Cone, E.J. (1992). Blood cannabinoids: I. Absorption of THC and
formation of 11-OH-THC and THCCOOH during and after smoking marijuana. Journal of Analytical
Toxicology, 16, 276–282.
Huffman, J.W. and Padgett, L.W. (2005). Recent developments in the medicinal chemistry of cannabimimetic indoles, pyrroles and indenes. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 12, 1395–1411.
Huffman, J.W., Dai, D., Martin, B.R., and Compton, D.R. (1994). Design, synthesis and pharmacology of
cannabimimetic indoles. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 4, 563–566.
Huffman, J.W., Hepburn, S.A., Reggio, P.H., Hurst, D.P., Wiley, J.L., and Martin, B.R. (2010). Synthesis
and pharmacology of 1-methoxy analogs of CP-47,497. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry, 18, 5475–5482.
Huffman, J.W., Mabon, R., Wu, M.-J., et al. (2003). 3-Indolyl-1-naphthylmethanes: new cannabimimetic indoles provide evidence for aromatic stacking interactions with the CB1 cannabinoid receptor.
Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry, 11, 539–549.
Huffman, J.W., Padgett, L.W., Isherwood, M.L., Wiley, J.L., and Martin, B.R. (2006). 1-Alkyl-2-aryl-4-(1naphthoyl)pyrroles: New high affinity ligands for the cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors. Bioorganic &
Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 16, 5432–5435.
Huffman, J.W., Szklennik, P.V., Almond, A., et al. (2005a). 1-Pentyl-3-phenylacetylindoles, a new class of
cannabimimetic indoles. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 15, 4110–4113.
Huffman, J.W., Thompson, A.L.S., Wiley, J.L., and Martin, B.R. (2008). Synthesis and pharmacology of
1-deoxy analogs of CP-47,497 and CP-55,940. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry, 16, 322–335.
Huffman, J.W., Zengin, G., Wu, M.-J., et al. (2005b). Structure-activity relationships for 1-alkyl-3-(1naphthoyl)indoles at the cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors: steric and electronic effects of naphthoyl
substituents. New highly selective CB2 receptor agonists. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry, 13, 89–112.
Hurst, D. (2010). Hospital survey shows more than 80 suspected cases of Spice overdose in past six months.
Idaho Reporter, September 16. [Online] Available at: http://www.idahoreporter.com/2010/hospitalsurvey-shows-more-than-80-suspected-cases-of-spice-overdose-in-past-six-months/.
Hurst, D., Loeffler, G., and Mclay, R. (2011). Psychosis associated with synthetic cannabinoid agonists: a
case series. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 1119.
Hutter, M., Broecker, S., Kneisel, S., and Auwarter, V. (2012). Identification of the major urinary metabolites in man of seven synthetic cannabinoids of the aminoalkylindole type present as adulterants in
‘herbal mixtures’ using LC-MS/MS techniques. Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 47, 54–65.
Järbe, T.U.C., Deng, H., Vadivel, S.K., and Makriyannis, A. (2011). Cannabinergic aminoalkylindoles,
including AM678=JWH018 found in ‘Spice’, examined using drug (Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol) discrimination for rats. Behavioural Pharmacology, 22, 498–507.
Järbe, T.U.C., Li, C., Vadivel, S.K., and Makriyannis, A. (2010). Discriminative stimulus functions of
methanandamide and Δ9-THC in rats: tests with aminoalkylindoles (WIN55,212-2 and AM678) and
ethanol. Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 208, 87–98.
Johnson, M.R., Althuis, T.H., Bindra, J.S., Harbert, C.A., Melvin, L.S., and Milne, G.M. (1981a). Potent analgetics derived from 9-nor-9 beta-hydroxyhexahydrocannabinol. NIDA Research Monographs, 34, 68–74.

Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics

Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S., Althuis, T.H., et al. (1981b). Selective and potent analgetics derived from cannabinoids. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 271S–82S.
Kacinko, S.L., Xu, A., Homan, J.W., McMullin, M.M., Warrington, D.M., and Logan, B.K. (2011).
Development and validation of a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method for the
identification and quantification of JWH-018, JWH-073, JWH-019, and JWH-250 in human whole
blood. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 35, 386–393.
Kikura-Hanajiri, R., Uchiyama, N., and Goda, Y. (2011). Survey of current trends in the abuse of psychotropic substances and plants in Japan. Legal Medicine (Tokyo), 13, 109–115.
Kronstrand, R., Roman, M., Thelander, G., and Eriksson, A. (2011). Unintentional fatal intoxications with
mitragynine and O-desmethyltramadol from the herbal blend Krypton. Journal of Analytical Toxicology,
35, 242–247.
Kumar, V., Alexander, M.D., Bell, M.R., et al. (1995). Morpholinoalkylindenes as antinociceptive agents:
novel cannabinoid receptor agonists. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 5, 381–386.
Lainton, J.A.H., Huffman, J.W., Martin, B.R., and Compton, D.R. (1995). 1-Alkyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)pyrroles: a new class of cannabinoid. Tetrahedron Letters, 36, 1401–1404.
Lapoint, J., James, L.P., Moran, C.L., Nelson, L.S., Hoffman, R.S., and Moran, J.H. (2011). Severe toxicity
following synthetic cannabinoid ingestion. Clinical Toxicology, 49, 760–764.
Lawston, J., Borella, A., Robinson, J.K., and Whitaker-Azmitia, P.M. (2000). Changes in hippocampal
morphology following chronic treatment with the synthetic cannabinoid WIN 55,212-2. Brain Research,
877, 407–410.
Logan, B.K. (2012). NMS Labs Trends Report: Changes in the Designer Drug Market Spring 2012 [Online]
Available at: http://www.nmslabs.com/uploads/PDF/Designer%20Drug%20Spring%20Update_BKL%20
Webinar_May%202012.pdf (accessed November 28, 2012).
Lombard, C., Nagarkatti, M., and Nagarkatti, P. (2007). CB2 cannabinoid receptor agonist, JWH-015, triggers apoptosis in immune cells: potential role for CB2-selective ligands as immunosuppressive agents.
Clinical Immunology, 122, 259–270.
Makara, J.K., Mor, M., Fegley, D., et al. (2005). Selective inhibition of 2-AG hydrolysis enhances endocannabinoid signaling in hippocampus. Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1139–1141. Corrigendum Nature
Neuroscience, 10, 137 (2007).
Manera, C., Tuccinardi, T., and Martinelli, A. (2008). Indoles and related compounds as cannabinoid
ligands. Mini-Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry, 8, 370–387.
Martin, B.R., Compton, D.R., Thomas, B.F., et al. (1991). Behavioral, biochemical, and molecular modeling evaluations of cannabinoid analogs. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 40, 471–478.
Matsuda, L.A., Lolait, S.J., Brownstein, M.J., Young, A.C., and Bonner, T.I. (1990). Structure of a cannabinoid receptor and functional expression of the cloned cDNA. Nature, 346, 561–564.
Mauler, F., Mittendorf, J., Horvath, E., and De Vry, J. (2002). Characterization of the diarylether sulfonylester (−)-(R)-3-(2-hydroxymethylindanyl-4-oxy) phenyl-4,4,4-trifluoro-1-sulfonate (BAY 38-7271)
as a potent cannabinoid receptor agonist with neuroprotective properties. Journal of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, 302, 359–368.
McMahon, L.R., Ginsburg, B.C., and Lamb, R.J. (2008). Cannabinoid agonists differentially substitute for
the discriminative stimulus effects of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in C57BL/6J mice. Psychopharmacology
(Berlin), 198, 487–495.
Mir, A., Obafemi, A., Young, A., and Kane, C. (2011). Myocardial infarction associated with use of the
synthetic cannabinoid K2. Pediatrics, 128, e1622–e1627.
Moller, I., Wintermeyer, A., Bender, K., et al. (2011). Screening for the synthetic cannabinoid JWH-018
and its major metabolites in human doping controls. Drug Testing and Analysis, 3, 609–620.
Monory, K., Tzavara, E.T., Lexime, J., et al. (2002). Novel, not adenylyl cyclase-coupled cannabinoid
binding site in cerebellum of mice. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 292,
231–235.

727

728

RECREATIONAL CANNABIS

Moran, C.L., Le, V.H., Chimalakonda, K.C., et al. (2011). Quantitative measurement of JWH-018 and
JWH-073 metabolites excreted in human urine. Analytical Chemistry, 83, 4228–4236.
Mueller, C.A., Weinmann, W., Dresen, S., Schreiber, A., and Gergov, M. (2005). Development of a
multi-target screening analysis for 301 drugs using a QTrap liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry system and automated library searching. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 19,
1332–1338.
Munro, S., Thomas, K.L., and Abu-Shaar, M. (1993). Molecular characterization of a peripheral receptor
for cannabinoids. Nature, 365, 61–65.
Musah, R.A., Domin, M.A., Walling, M.A., and Shepard, J.R. (2012). Rapid identification of synthetic cannabinoids in herbal samples via direct analysis in real time mass spectrometry. Rapid
Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 26, 1109–1114.
Pertwee, R., Griffin, G., Fernando, S., Li, X., Hill, A., and Makriyannis, A. (1995). AM630, a competitive
cannabinoid receptor antagonist. Life Sciences, 56, 1949–1955.
Rosenbaum, C.D., Carreiro, S.P. and Babu, K.M. (2012). Here today, gone tomorrow . . . And back again?
A review of herbal marijuana alternatives (K2, Spice), synthetic cathinones (bath salts), kratom, Salvia
divinorum, methoxetamine, and piperazines. Journal of Medical Toxicology, 8, 15–32.
Saario, S.M., Palomaki, V., Lehtonen, M., Nevalainen, T., Jarvinen, T., and Laitinen, J.T. (2006). URB754
has no effect on the hydrolysis or signaling capacity of 2-AG in the rat brain. Chemistry & Biology, 13,
811–814.
Salomone, A., Gerace, E., D’Urso, F., Di Corcia, D., and Vincenti, M. (2012). Simultaneous analysis of
several synthetic cannabinoids, THC, CBD and CBN, in hair by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Method validation and application to real samples. Journal of Mass
Spectrometry, 47, 604–610.
Schneir, A.B. and Baumbacher, T. (2012). Convulsions associated with the use of a synthetic cannabinoid
product. Journal of Medical Toxicology, 8, 62–64.
Seely, K.A., Lapoint, J., Moran, J.H., and Fattore, L. (2012a). Spice drugs are more than harmless herbal
blends: a review of the pharmacology and toxicology of synthetic cannabinoids. Progress in NeuroPsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 39, 234–243.
Seely, K.A., Brents, L.K., Radominska-Pandya, A., et al. (2012b). A major glucuronidated metabolite of
JWH-018 is a neutral antagonist at CB1 receptors. Chemical Research in Toxicology, 25, 825–827.
Showalter, V.M., Compton, D.R., Martin, B.R., and Abood, M.E. (1996). Evaluation of binding in a transfected cell line expressing a peripheral cannabinoid receptor (CB2): identification of cannabinoid receptor subtype selective ligands. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 278, 989–999.
Simmons, J.R., Skinner, C.G., Williams, J., Kang, C.S., Schwartz, M.D., and Wills, B.K. (2011).
Intoxication from smoking “spice.” Annals of Emergency Medicine, 57, 187–188.
Sobolevsky, T., Prasolov, I., and Rodchenkov, G. (2010). Detection of JWH-018 metabolites in smoking
mixture post-administration urine. Forensic Science International, 200, 141–147.
Song, Z.H. and Bonner, T.I. (1996). A lysine residue of the cannabinoid receptor is critical for receptor recognition by several agonists but not WIN55212-2. Molecular Pharmacology, 49, 891–186.
Tomiyama, K. and Funada, M. (2011). Cytotoxicity of synthetic cannabinoids found in “Spice” products:
the role of cannabinoid receptors and the caspase cascade in the NG 108-15 cell line. Toxicology Letters,
207, 12–17.
U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration (2011). Special Report: Synthetic
Cannabinoids and Synthetic Cathinones Reported in NFLIS, 2009-2010 [Online] Available at: http://www.
deadiversion.usdoj.gov/nflis/2010rx_synth.pdf.
Uchiyama, N., Kawamura, M., Kikura-Hanajiri, R., and Goda, Y. (2012a). URB-754: A new class of
designer drug and 12 synthetic cannabinoids detected in illegal products. Forensic Science International
[Online] Available at: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0379073812004343.

Cannabinoid Designer Drugs: Effects and Forensics

Uchiyama, N., Kikura-Hanajiri, R., Matsumoto, N., Huang, Z.L., Goda, Y., and Urade, Y. (2012b). Effects
of synthetic cannabinoids on electroencephalogram power spectra in rats. Forensic Science International,
215, 179–183.
Uchiyama, N., Kikura-Hanajiri, R., Ogata, J., and Goda, Y. (2010). Chemical analysis of synthetic cannabinoids as designer drugs in herbal products. Forensic Science International, 198, 31–38.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2011). Synthetic Cannabinoids in Herbal Products. [Online]
Available at: http://www.unodc.org/documents/scientific/Synthetic_Cannabinoids.pdf.
Vandevoorde, S., Jonsson, K.O., Labar, G., Persson, E., Lambert, D.M. and Fowler, C.J. (2007). Lack of
selectivity of URB602 for 2-oleoylglycerol compared to anandamide hydrolysis in vitro. British Journal
of Pharmacology, 150, 186–191.
Vandrey, R., Dunn, K.E., Fry, J.A., and Girling, E.R. (2012). A survey study to characterize use of Spice
products (synthetic cannabinoids). Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 120, 238–241.
Vann, R.E., Warner, J.A., Bushell, K., Huffman, J.W., Martin, B.R., and Wiley, J.L. (2009). Discriminative
stimulus properties of Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in C57Bl/6J mice. European Journal of
Pharmacology, 615, 102–107.
Wiebelhaus, J.M., Poklis, J.L., Poklis, A., Vann, R.E., Lichtman, A.H., and Wise, L.E. (2012). Inhalation
exposure to smoke from synthetic “marijuana” produces potent cannabimimetic effects in mice. Drug
and Alcohol Dependence, 126, 316–323.
Wiley, J.L. (1999). Cannabis: discrimination of “internal bliss”? Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior,
64, 257–260.
Wiley, J.L., Compton, D.R., Dai, D., et al. (1998). Structure-activity relationships of indole- and pyrrolederived cannabinoids. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 285, 995–1004.
Wiley, J.L., Jefferson, R.G., Griffin, G., et al. (2002). Paradoxical pharmacological effects of deoxy-­
tetrahydrocannabinol analogs lacking high CB1 receptor affinity. Pharmacology, 66, 89–99.
Wiley, J.L., Marusich, J.A., Martin, B.R., and Huffman, J.W. (2012a). 1-Pentyl-3-phenylacetylindoles and
JWH-018 share in vivo cannabinoid profiles in mice. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 123, 148–153.
Wiley, J.L., Smith, V.J., Chen, J., Martin, B.R., and Huffman, J.W. (2012b). Synthesis and pharmacology
of 1-alkyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indoles: steric and electronic effects of 4- and 8-halogenated naphthoyl substituents. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry, 20, 2067–2081.
Wilson, R.S., May, E.L., Martin, B.R., and Dewey, W.L. (1976). 9-Nor-9-hydroxyhexahydrocannabinols.
Synthesis, some behavioral and analgesic properties, and comparison with the tetrahydrocannabinols.
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 19, 1165–1167.
Winstock, A.R. and Barratt, M.J. (2013). Synthetic cannabis: a comparison of patterns of use and effect
profile with natural cannabis in a large global sample. Drug and Alcohol Dependence. [Online] Available
at: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0376871612004875.
Wollner, H. J., Matchett, J. R., Levine, J., and Loewe, S. (1942). Isolation of a physiologically active
tetrahydrocannabinol from Cannabis sativa resin. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 64,
26–29.
Zhang, Q., Ma, P., Cole, R.B., and Wang, G. (2006). Identification of in vitro metabolites of JWH-015, an
aminoalkylindole agonist for the peripheral cannabinoid receptor (CB2) by HPLC-MS/MS. Analytical
and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 386, 1345–1355.
Zhu, M., Ma, L., Zhang, D., et al. (2006). Detection and characterization of metabolites in biological matrices using mass defect filtering of liquid chromatography/high resolution mass spectrometry data. Drug
Metabolism and Disposition, 34, 1722–1733.
Zimmermann, U.S., Winkelmann, P.R., Pilhatsch, M., Nees, J.A., Spanagel, R., and Schulz, K. (2009).
Withdrawal phenomena and dependence syndrome after the consumption of “Spice Gold.“ Deutsches
Ärzteblatt International, 106, 464–467.

729

Index

A
absorption 296–300
oral administration 299
rectal administration 299–300
smoked administration 296–9
sublingual and dermal administration 300
abuse liability of designer drugs 717–20
dronabinol 384, 404
nabilone 399
prevalence 717–18
Sativex 384–6
Acanthamoeba spp. 269, 270
accidental injury 675, 676–7
see also driving impairment
4-acetoxy-2-geranyl-5-hydroxy-3-n-pentylphenol 8, 14
5-acetoxy-6-geranyl-3-n-pentyl-1,4-benzoquinone 15
acetyl stigmasterol 16
5-acetyl-4-hydroxycannabigerol 8
acetylcholine 165
acne vulgaris 594–5
Acorus calamus 285–6
acute coronary syndrome 566–7
acute effects of cannabis 693–5
acyl phosphatidylethanolamide phospholipase D
see N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine
phospholipase D
acyl-activating enzyme-1 93
addiction 173–88, 422, 649–50
cannabidiol 180
cannabis 175, 177–80
central mechanisms and substrates 173–4
central sites of action 177
clinical level 178–9
conditioned place preference 176
features of addictive drugs 174
laboratory level 177
NAc dopamine elevation 175
phytocannabinoids 175–7
and schizophrenia risk 664
self-administration in animal models 176–7
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin 180
VTA-MFB-NAc reward encoding neural axis 176
VTA-NAc core reward encoding neural axis 175
additivity 283–4
isobolograms 284, 289
adenosine, uptake inhibition by cannabidiol 146
administration forms see route of administration
adolescent cannabis use 700–1
adverse effects 421–5, 649–53
accidental injury 675, 676–7
acute use 693–5
addiction see addiction
amnesia 423
anxiety and depression 652–3

®

cardiovascular risk 697–8
chronic use 695–702
circulatory 675, 677–8
cognitive impairment 698
dependence 695–6
designer drugs 718–19
driving impairment 303, 305–6, 404, 423–4, 675,
676–7, 693–5
educational outcomes 698
euphoria 422
hormonal system and fertility 675, 678–9
immune system 675, 680
interindividual variability 675–6
liver 675, 680–1
mental disorders 700
neurocognitive 652
ocular 675, 680
other illicit drug use 698–9
overall toxicity 674–5
physical 674–91
pregnancy and fetal development 675, 679–80
psychomotor performance 675, 676
psychosis and schizophrenia see psychosis;
schizophrenia
respiratory risk 696–8
skin 674, 681
tolerance to 681
weight gain 424
see also individual drugs and compounds
Afghan Black 654
age-related macular degeneration 608–10
clinical features 608–9
phytocannabinoids in 609–10
AIDS-associated anorexia 376–7, 456
ajulemic acid 393
allergic encephalomyelitis 489
allergy 423
α2-adrenoceptors, cannabigerol activation 148, 150
alternative medical use 54–7, 59
compassionate access 55–6
as dietary supplement 54–5
as herb 54–5
integrity of 56–7
Alzheimer’s disease 515–16
AM630 713
Ammiano, Tom 347
amnesia 325, 423
amphetamines 175, 176, 307, 340, 437, 460, 527–9,
550, 662, 681
amphiregulin 635
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 516–17
analgesia 420, 473–86
animal models 474
cannabichromene 480

732

INDEX

analgesia (continued)
cannabidiol 475–8
cannabigerol 479–80
cannabis extracts 480–2
clinical trials 365–7, 387
dronabinol 387, 400, 402–3
nabilone 397
phytocannabinoid mixtures 480–2
Sativex 365–7, 386–7
tetrahydrocannabinol 473–5
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin 478–9
see also specific pain types
anandamide vi–vii, 33, 116, 137, 282, 283, 713
age-related macular degeneration 609–10
antiemesis 445, 446
appetite regulation 457, 462
in bone 619
cellular uptake 142
CSF levels 526, 651–2
and cytokine expression 264
enzymic degradation 228–9
metabolism 444
PPARα activation 230
reuptake inhibition 479, 480
in skin 585, 586
TRPV1 channel activation 602
vasorelaxant effects 213, 219, 220
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) 633
angiogenesis, cannabinoid-induced inhibition 632
animal models
addiction 176–7
analgesia 474
antiemesis 436–8, 439–40, 441
cardiovascular effects 208–10, 211
depression 195
immune system 261–2
reproduction 249–50, 252–3
schizophrenia 527, 528–30
anorexia see appetite regulation
antagonism 283–4
anti-epileptic drugs 548–9
anticonvulsant activity 547–63
cannabidiol 555–6
cannabidivarin 556–7
cannabis 549–51
THC 552–5
antidepressant activity 193–4
antiemesis 145, 420, 438–44
cannabidiol 440–2
cannabidiolic acid 442
cannabidivarin 444
cannabigerol 444
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
438–9
dronabinol 374–6, 400
endocannabinoids 444–6
nabilone 378, 394–6
tetrahydrocannabinol 438–40, 441–2
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid 442–3
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin 443
antiemesis, animal models 439–40
acute nausea 440, 441

®

anticipatory nausea 440, 441
conditioned gaping 437–8
conditioned taste avoidance 437
lying on belly 437
pica 436–7
antipsychotic effects 420–1
anxiety disorders 189–90
cannabis-induced 192, 652–3
nabilone in treatment of 396
phytocannabinoids in treatment of 192–3
tension-reduction hypothesis 189–90
Aphis gossypii (cotton melon aphid) 72
aphrodisiac effects of cannabis 245–7, 250
apigenin 283
apigenin-6,8-di-C-β-d-glucopyranoside 16
apoptosis, cannabinoid-induced 628, 629–32
appetite regulation 419, 455–72
AIDS-associated anorexia 376–7, 456
cannabidiol 464–5
dronabinol 401
endocannabinoids 457–63
homeostatic regulation of food intake 459–61
orosensory reward 461–3
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin 464
arachidonoylethanolamide see
N-arachidonoylethanolamine and anandamide
2-arachidonoylglycerol 193, 283, 585, 586, 713
in bone 619
arthritis 570–2
arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase 140
Ashworth spasticity scale 491, 492
asthma
dronabinol 401
nabilone 396
astrogliosis 509
atopic dermatitis 592–3
Atropa belladonna 280
atropine 280
Australia 54
autoflowering cannabis 80
autoimmune disorders 570–2
AZD1704 565
AZD1940 565
B
B lymphocytes 263, 265
baclofen 490
bacterial infections, resistance to 269–70
Baez, Peter 342
BAY 38-7271 713
Bediol 324
Bedrobinol 324
Bedrocan 324, 417
bhang 654
biocontrol 81
biphenyls 18–19
Blanzeopteris praedentata 68
blepharospasm 401
bone 619–25
cannabinoid system 619–22
structure 619
therapeutic targets 622–3

®

®

®

INDEX

bone mass
CB receptor effects 620, 621
GPR55 621–2
borneol 283
bornyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate 5, 6
botanic drug substance (BDS) 230
botanical drugs 65–6
botanical raw material (BRM) 89, 91
brain trauma 511–12
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) 513
breakthrough pain 426
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) 531
Britain see UK
Brown, Willie 341
Brucella suis 269
Buerger’s disease 678
bulbous trichromes 72–3
burns 31
C
α-cadinyl cannabigerolate 7–8
α-cadinyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate 5–6
caffeine 280
calamus root (Acorus calamus) 285–6
calcitonin gene-related peptide 165
calpains 508
Canada
distribution 349
Marihuana Medical Access Regulations 56–7
cancer 626–43
antitumor immunity regulation 632–3
cannabinoid antitumor effects 636–7
cannabinoid-based combination therapy 635–6
cannabinoid-induced apoptosis 628, 629–32
endocannabinoid system in tumor generation 637
induction of cancer cell death 629–32
inhibition of angiogenesis, invasion and
metastasis 632
mechanisms of action 629–33
preclinical antitumor activity 629
resistance mechanisms 633–5
route of administration 637
cancer pain
dronabinol 395
nabilone 395, 398
Sativex 388
canflavin C 16
cannabichromanones 14
cannabichromene 9, 11, 67
analgesia 480
chemical structure 138
enzyme interactions 139
pharmacology 137–43
receptor interactions 139
research 286
skin disorders 590
transporter and cellular uptake interactions 142
cannabichromenic acid (CBCA) 93
phenotype 100
cannabichromevarin 67
cannabichromevarinic acid 95
cannabicitran 14

®

(–)-7R-cannabicourmarone 14
cannabicyclohexanol 711
cannabicyclol 11–12, 94
cannabidiol 10, 90, 92, 261, 287–8, 648
addiction 180
adenosine uptake inhibition 146
adverse effects 681
analgesia 475–8
anti-inflammatory effects 571
anticonvulsant activity 555–6
antiemesis 440–2
anxiety disorders 193
and apoptosis 632
appetite regulation 464–5
cancer therapy 635–6
cardiovascular effects 211, 213, 219
chemical structure 138, 158, 542
diabetes 569–70
diabetic retinopathy 607–8
enzyme interactions 139–40
glycine ligand-gated ion channel interaction 147
kidney disease 575
liver disease 573
molecular targets 477
oral fluid levels 306
pharmacokinetics 287, 308–10
pharmacology 143–7
PPARγ interaction 147
receptor interactions 139, 143–4
research 286
schizophrenia 526–37
serotonin receptors 144–7
skin disorders 590
and sleep 541–2
synaptic transmission effects 166
transporter and cellular uptake interactions 142
TRP cation channel interaction 147
vascular effects 218–19
cannabidiolic acid (CBDA) 93
antiemesis 442
chemical structure 138
enzyme interactions 140
pharmacology 147–8
phenotype 99
receptor interactions 140
serotonin receptors 140, 147–8
cannabidivarin 92
anticonvulsant activity 556–7
antiemesis 444
chemical structure 138
enzyme interactions 140
pharmacology 150–1
receptor interactions 139
transporter and cellular uptake interactions 142
cannabidivarinic acid 95
cannabielsoin 11, 94
cannabifuran 14
cannabigerol 5–8, 73, 92, 261
adrenoreceptors 148–50
analgesia 479–80
antiemesis 444
chemical structure 138, 158

733

734

INDEX

cannabigerol (continued)
enzyme interactions 140
pharmacology 148–50
receptor interactions 148–50
research 286
serotonin receptors 149–50
skin disorders 590
synaptic transmission effects 166
transporter and cellular uptake interactions 142
vascular effects 220
cannabigerolic acid (CBGA) 72, 93, 331
chemical structure 138
enzyme interactions 140
pharmacology 150
phenotype 99–100
receptor interactions 149
cannabigerolic acid monomethyl ether 97
cannabigerovarin 92, 95
chemical structure 138
pharmacology 150–1
cannabigerovarinic acid 7, 95
cannabigerovarinic acid monomethyl ether 94, 97
cannabigevarin 149
cannabine 281
cannabinodiol 3, 10–11
cannabinoid acids 93
cannabinoid receptors see CB receptors; and entries
beginning with receptor
Cannabinoid Use in Progressive Inflammatory brain
Disease (CUPID) study 494
cannabinoid-based medicines (CBMs) 323
see also medical use; and individual compounds
cannabinoids 3–15, 90
addiction 173–88
appetite regulation 463–5
biogenesis 93–4
designer drugs see designer drugs
distribution 67
drug interactions 423, 681
endocannabinoids see endocannabinoids
exposure prediction models 310–11
in hair 307–8
HPG axis effects 248–9
inhibition of synaptic transmission 159–61
irradiance level and yield 78–81
justification for synthesis 73
medical use 393–415
ocular effects 602–4
oral administration 299
in oral fluid 303–7
pharmacokinetics 296–316
phytocannabinoids see phytocannabinoids
in pregnancy 253–6
profile 91
rectal administration 299–300
reproductive system effects 245–61
and sleep 542–3
smoked administration 296–9
sublingual/dermal administration 300
in sweat 307
in urine 311–12
see also individual cannabinoid compounds

cannabinol 12–13, 94, 261
chemical structure 116, 158
Ki value 117
oral fluid levels 306
pharmacokinetics 310
pharmacology 124–6
receptor interactions 228
research 286
skin disorders 590
vascular effects 220
cannabioxepane 15
cannabiripsol 14
Cannabis spp.
chemotypes 89–110
taxonomy 89–91
Cannabis indica 90, 284, 326
Cannabis sativa L. 44, 66, 67, 90, 326
cannabinoids 3–15, 67
constituents 3–19
essential oils 281–3
and sleep 541–2
noncannabinoids 15–19, 280–95
trichromes see trichromes
cannabis buyers’ clubs 328
cannabis cakes 331
cannabis extract
addiction 177–80
and anxiety 192
aphrodisiac effects 245–7, 250
appetite stimulation 455–7
cardiovascular effects 210–11, 212–13
chemotypes 89–110
citrus fruits in treatment of toxicity 285
and depression 194
extracts/tincture 48
‘headspace’ 283
medical use see medical use
morphology 66–7
non-medical use 53–7
non-phytocannabinoid constituents 280–95
origins 66
in pregnancy 253–6
research 286
secondary metabolites see cannabinoids
strain 654–5
Cannabis in Multiple Sclerosis (CAMS) study 491
cannabis oil 331–2
cannabis resin 5, 10, 47, 48, 73, 361, 551
cannabis tea 330–1
cannabis-based medicines
benefits and risks 373–92
clinical trials 360–1, 365–9
controlled drug specific requirements 361
development 356–62
evidence of efficacy 356–7, 361–2, 369
licensing 373
Marketing Authorisation Application 362–70
pharmaceutical development 357–8
phase 1 and phase 2 studies 360
quality documentation 362–3
regulatory issues 364–70
safety documentation 358–60, 370

INDEX

safety testing 363
see also medical use; and specific drugs/uses
cannabisol 5, 6
cannabitetrol 14
cannabitriol 13
cannabsin 18
Cannador 322, 417
cannaflavin A 283
capitate trichromes 67
sessile 68–9
stalked 69–72
capsaicin 281
CARDIA study 677–8
cardiac effects 211–12
cardiometabolic disorders 564–70
cardiovascular disease 565–7
clinically relevant effects 564–5
metabolic disease 567–70
cardiomyopathy 565–6
cardiovascular effects 208–26
acute 208–11
anesthetized animals 208–9
cardiac 211–12
CB receptor distribution 215–16
chronic 212–13
conscious animals 209–10
humans 210–11
mechanism of action 209
regional blood flow changes 211
vascular 213–19
see also specific drugs and conditions
cardiovascular risk 697
reduction of 697–8
caregiver distribution model 345–6
carmagerol 8
caryophyllene 72, 282, 287
chemical structure 116
Ki value 117
pharmacology 129–30
caryophyllene oxide 282, 283
caspases 508, 589
catalase 141
CB-25 713
CB-52 713
CB1 receptors 158
and bone mass 620, 621
eye 602
inhibition of synaptic transmission 159–61
neuroprotection 508
skin 586–7
CB2 receptors 158–9
and bone mass 620, 621
eye 602–3
inhibition of synaptic transmission 159–61
neuroprotection 509
skin 586–7
CBCA see cannabichromenic acid
CBDA see cannabidiolic acid
CBGA see cannabigerolic acid
cellular uptake, cannabinoid effects on 142
cerebral infarction, cannabidiol effects on 145–6
Cesamet see nabilone

®

®

charas 31, 282, 284, 285, 654
chemical phenotypes see chemotypes
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting 374–6,
419, 435–6
dronabinol 374–6
nabilone 378
THC 438–40
chemotypes 89–110
biogenesis 93–4
breeding 97–8
cannabinoid-free 104–6
and Cannabis classification 89–91
CBCA-rich/predominant 100
CBDA-predominant 99
CBGA-predominant 99–100
components of 91–2
and evolutionary fitness 106
genetic determination 93–7
history 106–7
inheritance 94–7
molecular studies 106–8
novel breeding prospects 107–8
and production procedures/conditions 92–3
pure 98–106
THCA-predominant 98
THCVA-rich 100–4
chemovars 326
cholinergic transmission, phytocannabinoid
effects 165
chronic effects of cannabis 695–702
cardiovascular risk 697–8
cognitive impairment 698
dependence 695–6
educational outcomes 698–9
mental disorders 700
other illicit drug use 698–9
psychosis and schizophrenia see psychosis;
schizophrenia
respiratory risk 696–8
see also specific effects
chronic fatigue syndrome 420
chrysoeriol 15, 16
Cinchona officinalis 280
circadian rhythms 539
circulatory effects 675, 677–8
(±)-6,7-cis-epoxycannabigerol 8
(±)-6,7-cis-epoxycannabigerolic acid 8
(±)-Δ7-cis-isotetrahydrocannabivarin-C3 14
cisplatin 573–4
citrus fruits, in treatment of cannabis toxicity 285
Clinical Trial Application (CTA) 360–1
clinical trials 360–1, 374–7
AIDS-associated anorexia and weight loss 376–7
blinding of study medication 369–70, 383
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting 374–6,
378
multiple sclerosis 367–9, 379–84
pain 365–7, 387
see also specific drugs and conditions
Clinician Administered Dissociative States Scale
(CADSS) 531
cluster headaches 402

735

736

INDEX

CNR1 622–3
CNR2 622–3
co-operatives 346
coca bush see Erythroxylum coca
cocaine 161, 175, 176, 253, 280, 698–9
Coffea arabica 280
coffee shops 339–40
cognitive impairment 530, 698
nabilone 399
Sativex 384
colon cancer 235–6
coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara) 720
combinatorial synergy 284–6
Committee on Safety of Drugs 357
comparative doses 426
compassionate access 55–6
concentrates 331–2
conditioned place preference 176
contact allergic dermatitis 593–4
contraindications 421–2
Convention on Psychotropic Substances (1971)
47–8
cotton melon aphid (Aphis gossypii) 72
CP-47,497 711, 712, 713
CP-55,244 712
CP-55,940 711, 712
see also CP55940; CP55,940
CP55940 117, 119, 120, 123, 124, 126, 127–8, 129, 143,
148, 149, 165, 235
CP55,940 635, 711, 717
critical day length 73
Cryptotis parva 439
cyclooxygenase 140, 283, 606
p-cymene 282
CYP1A 140
CYP1A2 140
CYP1B1 140
CYP2A6 141
CYP2B6 140
CYP2C9 140
CYP2D6 140
CYP3A4 141
CYP3A5 140
CYP3A7 141
cystolythic trichromes 68
cytokines 262, 267–9

®

D
dagga 654
damiana (Turnera diffusa) 720
daucosterol 16
decriminalization 51–2, 58–9, 702
dehydrocannabifuran 14
delivery services for medical cannabis 346
dementia-related agitation
dronabinol 402
nabilone 395, 398
Dendrobium spp. 79
deoxyxylulose pathway 93
depenalization 51
dependence 695
risk reduction 695–6

depression
animal studies 195
cannabis-induced 194, 652–3
phytocannabinoid effects 193–4
dermal administration 300, 331–2, 417–18
dermatitis 592–4
atopic 592–3
contact allergic 593–4
dermis 584–5
see also skin
designer drugs 710–27
abuse liability 717–20
adverse effects 718–19
chemical structures 711–12
chemistry 710–14
forensic/analytical chemistry 720–3
immunoassay 721
legal status 719–20
markers of use 721
mass spectrometry 721–2
mechanism of action 714–15
medical use see cannabis-based medicines
pharmacokinetics 715–16
pharmacology/physiology 714–17
preclinical pharmacology 716–17
prevalence of abuse 717–18
product identification 720
recreational use 713–14
structure-activity relationships 713
toxicology 717
see also individual drugs
desired effects of cannabis 647–9
dexanabinol 393
4,7-dimethoxy-1,2,5-trihydroxyphenanthrene 16–17
diabetes 567–70
diabetic cardiomyopathy 565–6
diabetic retinopathy 606–8
clinical features 606–7
future directions 608
phytocannabinoids in 607–8
diacylglycerol lipase α 141
digestive tract see gastrointestinal system
Digitalis purpurea 280
digitoxin 280
diacylglycerol lipase (DAGL) 586, 587
9,10-dihydro-2,3,5,6-tetramethoxyphenanthrene-1,4dione 17
dimethylheptylpyran (DMHP) 711
discontinuation of therapy 427–8
dispensaries 340–3, 349–50
and cannabis use 350–1
and crime 351–2
distribution centres 300–1
Canada 349
and cannabis use 351
caregiver model 345–6
co-operatives 346
and crime 351–2
delivery service 346
dispensaries 340–3, 349–50
expansion and formalization 352–3
history 339–44

INDEX

informal distribution 347
local regulation 346–7
Netherlands 339–40, 343
pharmacy vs. social model of care 343–4
research 349–52
storefront 344–5
USA 340–1, 346–9
vertical integration 348–9
divarinolic acid 93, 95
dorsal raphe 539
driving impairment 303, 305–6, 423–4, 675, 676–7,
693–5
dronabinol 404
reduction of 694–5
driving under the influence of drugs (DUID)
investigations 303, 305–6
dronabinol 54, 299, 322, 328, 373–7, 393, 399–405,
417, 648
abuse liability 384, 404
analgesia 400, 402–3
antiemesis 374–6, 400, 439
appetite regulation 376–7, 395, 401, 456
blepharospasm 395, 401
cancer pain 387, 395
cannabis dependency 395, 401
chemical structure 400
clinical trials 374–7
cluster headaches 395, 402
dementia-related agitation 395, 402
driving impairment 404
drug interactions 404
efficacy 375–6, 377
gastrointestinal 402
glaucoma 395, 402
gynecomastia 404
immunosuppression 405
intracranial hypertension 395, 402
irritable bowel syndrome 395
Isaac’s syndrome 395
movement disorders 402
multiple sclerosis 395, 403, 492–3
neuropathic pain 395
and night vision 395
obsessive-compulsive disorder 395, 403
obstructive sleep apnea 395, 403
ocular effects 405
pediatric use 405
prescribing 425
pruritus 395, 403
regulatory issues 374
safety 376, 377
scheduling 48, 49
schizophrenia 395, 403
sexual dysfunction 395, 404
spinal cord injury 387
Tourette’s syndrome 395, 403
trichotillomania 395, 404
see also tetrahydrocannabinol
drug development 356–62
clinical trials 360–1, 365–9
controlled drug specific requirements 361
Marketing Authorisation Application 362–70

pharmaceutical 357–8
phase 1 and phase 2 studies 360
safety testing 358–60, 363, 370
drug interactions 423, 681
see also individual drugs
dry mouth 678
dyssomnias 540
E
East India Company 44
educational outcomes 698–9
efficacy 361–2, 369
dronabinol 375–6, 377
nabilone 378
Sativex 369, 380–3
electroencephalography (EEG) 538
electromyography (EMG) 538, 539
electrooculography (EOG) 538
electrophysiological studies 665
elimination 302–3
endocannabinoids 283
antiemesis 444–6
appetite stimulation 457–63, 567
degradation 228–9
as endogenous modulators 444–5
homeostatic regulation of food intake
459–61
in nausea and vomiting 445–6
orosensory reward 461–3
in skin 585–8
and tumor generation 637
endocrine regulation 195–8
growth hormone 197–8
HPA axis 195–6
HPT axis 196–7
melatonin 198
endotoxin-induced uveitis 610–11
enzymes
cannabinoid effects on 140–1
in skin 587
see also specific enzymes
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 635
epidermis 583–4
see also skin
epilepsy 421, 547–63
cannabidiol 555–6
cannabidivarin 556–7
cannabis 549–51
current treatment 548–9
phytocannabinoid effects 549–57
preclinical studies 551–2
risk factors and development 547–8
seizure classification 548
tetrahydrocannabinol 552–5
Erythroxylum coca 44, 280
esophageal sphincter 231
γ-eudesmyl cannabigerolate 7, 8
γ-eudesmyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate 5, 6
EudraCT form 360
euphol 288
euphoria 422
European Medicines Agency (EMA) 363

®

737

738

INDEX

European Union
Directive 2004/24/EC 362
Roadside Testing Assessment (ROSITA) 303
evolutionary fitness 106
experimental autoimmune uveoretinitis 611
exposure prediction models 310–11
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 635
eye 675, 680
CB1 receptors 602
CB2 receptors 602–3
intraocular pressure 602, 604–5
eye disorders 601–18
age-related macular degeneration 608–10
diabetic retinopathy 606–8
glaucoma 396, 402, 604–6
uveoretinitis 610–12
F
farnesylpyrophosphate 93
fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) 141, 228–9, 283,
491, 505, 586, 587, 620, 713
fatty acids 17
Federal Food, Drugs and Cosmetic Act (1938)
357
fenchyl alcohol 283
fenchyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate 5, 6
fertility 675, 678–9
male 250–1
fetal development effects 675, 679–80
fibromyalgia 397, 420
filaggrin 588, 589
flavonoids 15–16, 283
floral development 76–8
Food and Drug Administration 54, 58, 327, 364
food intake, homeostatic regulation 459–61
foreign travel 428
functional MRI 665–6
fungal infections, resistance to 269–70
G
G protein-coupled receptor 55 229
GABA 250, 490
phytocannabinoid effects 164
ganja 280, 281, 284–5, 654
gastrointestinal system 227–44
adverse effects 675, 678
CB receptors in 227–8
clinical studies 236–7
colon cancer 235–6
endocannabinoid degradation 228–9
G protein-coupled receptor 55 229
gastric acid secretion 230–1
gastric protection 230–1
gastrointestinal motility 231–2, 234–5, 236–7
inflammatory bowel disease 237
intestinal fluid secretion 233
intestinal inflammation 233–5
irritable bowel syndrome 236–7
lower esophageal sphincter 231
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors 230
TRP channels 229–30
visceral sensation 233, 236–7
see also specific drugs and conditions

gemcitabine 635
2-geranyl-5-hydroxy-3-n-pentyl-1,4-benzoquinone
15
geranylpyrophosphate:olivetolate transferase
(GOT) 93, 106
geranylpyrophosphate 93, 95
Germany
Pharmacy Ordinance (1872) 46
scheduling 54
Gilead “4-in-1” AIDS treatment 58
glandular trichomes 67
glasshouse growing 79
glaucoma 604–6
clinical features 604
future directions 606
phytocannabinoids in 604–6
topical application of cannabinoids 605–6
glutamate, phytocannabinoid effects 164
glutathione peroxidase 140
glutathione reductase 140
glycine ligand-gated ion channels 147
GPR55 620
and bone mass 621–2
green 661
growing temperature 81
growth hormone regulation 197–8
growth medium 81
Guy, Geoffrey 288
GW Pharmaceuticals 65–6, 89, 288
see also Sativex
gynecomastia 404

®

H
hair, cannabinoids in 307–8
harm reduction policies 692–709
adolescent cannabis use 700–1
cannabis prohibition 702
cardiovascular risk 697–8
definition 692–3
dependence 695–6
high-risk populations 701
higher THC cannabis products 701–2
research priorities 702–3
respiratory risk 697–8
hash see cannabis resin
hashish 4, 10–13, 31, 46–7, 281, 283
Haze 98, 325
headache 395, 398, 402
cluster 402
medication-overuse 398
Helichrysum spp. 67
hemp 44, 90
as aphrodisiac 245–6
flowering tops 281
leaves 281
herbal synergy see therapeutic synergy
heroin 698–9
high-risk populations, interventions 701
Hooper, David 285
hops 66
hormone levels 675, 678–9
horticulture 65–88
future research 84

INDEX

history 66
indoor cultivation 74–83
morphology 66–7
natural outdoor cultivation 74
phytocannabinoid biosynthesis 73
plant development 74–84
trichromes 67–74
hospital admission 428
host resistance 269–70
in vitro infections 269
in vivo infections 270
HPA see hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
HPG see hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis
HPT see hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis
HU-210 712
humulene 282, 283
Humulus spp. 66
huntingtin 513
Huntington’s disease 513–14
8-hydroxy-isohexahydrocannabivirin 14
hyperactivity 528–9
hyperemesis 678
hyposalivation 678
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA) 195–6
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPG) 248–9
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis (HPT)
196–7
I
immune system 261–79
adverse effects on 675, 680
B lymphocytes 265
cells of 263
cytokines 267–9
host resistance 269–70
mixed cell populations 262–3
mononuclear cells, macrophages and macrophagelike cells 263–5
natural killer cells 267
T lymphocytes 265–7
in vitro/ex vivo models 262–9
in vivo models 261–2
immunoassay 721
immunosuppression 405
Indian Hemp Drugs Commission 45, 55–6
indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase 140
indoor cultivation 74–83
autoflowering cannabis 80
biocontrol 81
floral development 76–8
glasshouse growing 79
growing temperature 81
growth medium 81
harvest and drying 82–3
irradiance level and cannabinoid yield 78–81
mother plant stock 76
plant nutrition 82
processing 83
selection of best genetic material 75
thigmomorphogenesis 76
vegetative growth 75
inflammatory bowel disease 237
inflammatory disorders 570–2

informal distribution 347
inheritance 94–7
insomnia 540–1
interferon-γ 268
interindividual variability
adverse effects 675–6
response to recreational use 653–5
interleukins 268, 607
International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated
Plants (ICNCP) 90
International Conference on Harmonisation of
Technical Requirements for Registration of
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) 357
international controls 44–64
decriminalization 51–2, 58–9, 702
depenalization 51
development of 46–7
improved technologies for development 58
increasing number of products 57–8
interest in alternative medicines 59
Internet and cannabis access 57
interpretation and implementation 50–3
legalization 52–3, 58–9
medical vs. nonmedical use 53–7
NGOs 57
nineteenth-century scientific developments 45–6
scheduling 48, 54
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs (1961) 47–8
treaty obligations 49–50
UK role 44–5
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
(1988) 49
United Nations Convention on Psychotropic
Substances (1971) 47–8, 361
International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) 548
Internet 57
intestinal fluid secretion 233
intestinal inflammation 233–5
intestinal motility 231–2, 234–5, 236–7
intracranial hypertension 395, 402
intraocular pressure 602, 604–5
investigational medicinal products (IMPs) 361
Investigational New Drug (IND) submission 361
Investigator Brochure (IB) 360–1
involucrin 589
ion channels in vasorelaxation response 216
irradiance level and cannabinoid yield 78–81
irritable bowel syndrome 236–7, 395, 421
Isaac’s syndrome 395
ischemia 511–12
ischemic reperfusion injury 565
isobolograms 284, 289
isocannabispiradienone 17, 18
J
Jordan, Frank 341
juices 332
JW-018 712
JWH-015 713
JWH-073 712
JWH-133 611
JWH-200 712

739

740

INDEX

K
K complexes 538
kidney diseases 573–5
Krypton 719
L
legal highs 661
legalization 52–3, 58–9
Legionella pneumophila 269, 271
Lemberger, Louis 393
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) 282
leptin 459–60
levonantradol 393
chemical structure 711
limonene 282, 283, 287, 289
linalool 282, 283, 287
lipoxygenase 140, 141
Listeria monocytogenes 270
liver, adverse effects 675, 680–1
liver disease 572–3
local regulation of distribution 346–7
locus coeruleus 539
loricrin 589
M
McCaffrey, Barry 341
macrophages 263–5
macrophage-like cells 263–5
Macugen (pegaptanib) 608
magnesium-ATPase 140
marijuana see cannabis
Marinol see dronabinol
markers of drug use 721
Marketing Authorisation Application 362–70
clinical data 363–4
discussion with national authorities 363–4
preparation 364
quality documentation 362–3
safety testing 363
marshmallow (Althaea officinalis) 720
mass spectrometry 721–2
Maternal Health Practices and Child Development
Study (MHPCD) 254
MDK 633
Mechoulam, Raphael 280
medial forebrain bundle (MFB) 173
Medicago sativa 72
medical use 53–7, 193, 320–1, 418–21
cannabis-based medicines see cannabis-based
medicines
chemovars 326
clinical practice 415–33
distribution see distribution centres
prescribing 424–9
self-medication 319–38
see also specific drugs and conditions
medication-overuse headache 398
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory
Agency 58
Medisins cultivar 98
melanin concentrating hormone 460
melatonin 198

®

®

Melissa officinalis 282
men, cannabis effects
reproductive system 249–51
sexuality 249–51
mental disorders 700
see also specific conditions
Mentha spp. 282
metabolic disease 567–70
metabolism 301–2
metastasis, cannabinoid-induced inhibition 632–3
7-methoxy-cannabispirone 17, 18
5'-methyl-4-pentylbiphenyl-2,6,2'-triol 18
MFB see medial forebrain bundle
microglia 263
mint (Mentha spp.) 282
Mirkarimi, Ross 342
Misuse of Drug Regulations 48
Misuse of Drugs Act (1971) 48, 51, 65, 361
monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) 228–9, 283, 572–3,
586, 587, 713
monocytes 263
mononuclear cells 263–5
monoterpenoids 67, 78, 281, 282, 283
Moreau, Jacques-Joseph 281
morphine 45
mother plant stock 76
motor neuron disease 395, 398, 516
see also amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
movement disorders 395, 397, 402
see also multiple sclerosis
mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris) 720
mullein (Verbascum thapsus) 720
multiple sclerosis 419–20, 487–501
bladder incontinence 491
chronic neuropathic pain 495–6
clinical evidence 491–2
dronabinol 403, 492–3
experimental evidence 490–1
future directions 496
history of cannabinoid use 490
nabilone 397
natural history and physiology 487–9
neuroprotection 494–5
primary progressive 489
recent studies 492–3
relapsing-remitting 487, 488
Sativex 367–9, 379–84, 490–1, 492–3
spasticity 369, 379–80, 490
symptom management 490–3
symptoms and disability 489–90
Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale (MSIS-29)
questionnaire 495
MUSEC (Multiple Sclerosis and Extract of Cannabis)
trial 419, 493
myocardial infarction 677
myrcene 282, 283, 287

®

N
nabilone 322, 377–8, 393–9, 417, 710
abuse liability 399
adverse effects 399
analgesia 395, 397, 398

INDEX

antiemesis 394–6, 438
anxiolytic activity 395, 396
asthma 395, 396
chemical structure 394, 542, 711
clinical pharmacology 394
clinical trials 387
dementia-related agitation 395, 398
efficacy 378
fibromyalgia 395, 397
medication-overuse headache 395, 398
movement disorders 395, 397
multiple sclerosis 395, 397
open-angle glaucoma 395, 396
posttraumatic stress disorder 398
prescribing 425
regulatory issues 377
safety 378
sleep disorders 542
spinal cord injury 398
upper motor neuron disease 395, 398
nabiximols see Sativex
NAc see nucleus accumbens
N-acyl phosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase
D 586, 587
NAD(P)H-quinone reductase 141
Naegleria fowleri 269
N-arachidonoylethanolamine 193 see also
anandamide
natural killer cells 263, 267
nausea and vomiting 435–54
cannabinoid effects see antiemesis
chemotherapy-induced 374–6, 435–6
see also individual drugs
nausea and vomiting, animal models 436–8
conditioned gaping 437–8
conditioned taste avoidance 437
lying on belly 437
pica 436–7
nervous system, CB receptor distribution 157–9
nerylpyrophosphate 93
Netherlands 53
coffee shops 339–40
medical cannabis distribution 339–40, 343
neurochemical imaging studies 666
neurocognitive function 652–3
neurodegenerative disorders 505–25
Alzheimer’s disease 515–16
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 516–17
brain trauma 511–12
Huntington’s disease 513–14
ischemia 511–12
Parkinson’s disease 514–15
spinal injury 511–12
neuropathic pain 395, 420, 495–6
dronabinol 395, 402–3
nabilone 395, 398
Sativex 387–8
neuropeptide Y 460
neuroprotective effects
cannabinoids 494–5
CB receptor-independent 510–11
CB1 receptor-mediated 508

®

®

CB2 receptor-mediated 509
clinical evidence 494–5
experimental evidence 494
Huntington’s disease 513
phytocannabinoids 507–11
neurotransmission 157–72
CB receptor distribution 157–8
CB receptor interactions 157
inhibition of synaptic transmission 159–61, 162–7
see also individual neurotransmitters
new chemical entities (NCEs) 58
New Drug Application (NDA) 360
Nicotiana spp. 82
Nicotiana tabacum 280
nicotine 280
night vision 395
nitric oxide 508, 607
nitric oxide synthase 250
inducible 566
nitrogenous compounds 18
3-nitropropionate 514
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) 57
noncannabinoids 15–19, 280–95
additivity and antagonism 283–4
combinatorial synergy without cannabis 284–6
current interest 288–9
synergy 283–4, 286–8
see also individual substances
nonmedical use of cannabis 53–7
see also recreational use
nonpsychological effects see physical effects of
cannabis
nonpsychotropic phytocannabinoids 137–56
cannabichromene 137–43
cannabidiol 143–7
cannabidiolic acid 147–8
cannabidivarin 150–1
cannabigerol 148–50
cannabigerolic acid 150
cannabigerovarin 150–1
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid 150
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid 150
norepinephrine 165
Northern Lights 98, 325, 654
N-palmitoylethanolamine 585, 586
nucleus accumbens 173
dopamine elevation 175
O
obesity 567–70
obsessive-compulsive disorder 403
obstructive sleep apnea 403
ocular effects see eye
oleoyl serine 619
oleoylethanolamide 230
olivetolic acid 93, 95
olivetolic acid cyclase 93
opium 45
opium poppy (Papaver somniferum) 44, 280
oral administration 299, 417
tea and edibles 330–1
tinctures, concentrates, and juices 331–2

741

742

INDEX

oral fluid
cannabinoids in 303–7
passive contamination 304
orosensory reward 461–3
O’Shaughnessy, William B. 44
osteoporosis 619, 622
Ottawa Prenatal Prospective Study (OPPS) 255
outdoor cultivation 73
overdose 424, 426–7
P
pain
breakthrough 426
cancer-related 388, 398
neuropathic see neuropathic pain
postoperative 420
relief see analgesia
palmitoylethanolamide see N-palmitoylethanolamine
panic disorder 191
Papaver somniferum (opium poppy) 44, 280
paranoia 423
parasomnias 540
paraventricular nucleus 250
Parkinson’s disease 514–15
pediatric use 31–3
dronabinol 405
pegaptanib (Macugen ) 608
Pelargonium spp. 72
peltate trichrome 69
Peron, Dennis 341–2, 344, 346, 349
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors see PPAR
personal use 50–1
pharmaceutical development of cannabis-based
medicines 357–8
pharmaceutical industry 45–6
pharmacodynamic interactions 283
pharmacokinetic interactions 283
pharmacokinetics 296–316
absorption 296–300
cannabidiol 308–10
cannabinoids in hair 307–8
cannabinoids in oral fluid 303–7
cannabinoids in sweat 307
cannabinol 310
designer drugs 715–16
distribution 300–1
elimination 302–3
exposure prediction models 310–11
metabolism 301–2
oral administration 299, 330–1, 417
rectal administration 299–300
smoked administration 296–9, 416
sublingual/dermal administration 300, 331–2,
417–18
THC 296–303
urinary levels 311–12
vaporization 330, 416–17
pharmacological history 23–43
pharmacology 115–36
anti-schizophrenia drugs 528–30
antitumor drugs 629
cannabinol 124–6

®

caryophyllene 129–30
designer drugs 714–17
nonpsychotropic phytocannabinoids 137–56
preclinical see preclinical data
seizure-related effects 551–2
tetrahydrocannabinol 118–23, 125, 126
Δ8-tetrahydrocannabinol 123–4
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin 126–9
Pharmacy Act (1868) 46
PharmCheck patch 307
phenanthrenes 16–17
phospholipase A2 140
photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) 78
physical effects of cannabis 674–91
accidental injury 675, 676–7
circulation 675, 677–8
driving impairment 303, 305–6, 404, 423–4, 675,
676–7, 693–5
eye 675, 680
gastrointestinal system 675, 678
hormonal system and fertility 675, 678–9
immune system 675, 680
interindividual variability 675–6
liver 675, 680–1
overall toxicity 674–5
pregnancy and fetal development 675
psychomotor performance 675, 676
skin 674, 681
tolerance to 681
weight gain 424
physician attitudes to self-medication 326–7
phytocannabinoids 115, 261
age-related macular degeneration 608–10
Alzheimer’s disease 515–16
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 516–17
anxiety disorders 189–90, 192–3
biosynthesis 73
bone effects 619–25
brain trauma 511–12
cancer 626–43
cardiometabolic disorders 564–70
cardiovascular system effects 208–26
central nervous system effects 164
depression 193–5
diabetic retinopathy 606–8
endocrine regulation 195–8
epilepsy 421, 547–63
gastrointestinal system 227–44
glaucoma 396, 402, 604–6
Huntington’s disease 513–14
immune system 261–79
inflammatory disorders 570–2
ischemia 511–12
kidney disease 573–5
liver disease 572–3
mechanisms of action 629–33
nausea and vomiting 435–54
neurodegenerative disorders 505–25
nonpsychotropic 137–56
panic disorder 191
Parkinson’s disease 514–15
peripheral nervous system effects 165

INDEX

posttraumatic stress disorder 191–2
receptor interactions 157
schizophrenia 526–37
skin disorders 582–600
sleep disorders 538–46
spinal injury 511–12
synaptic transmission effects 162–6
uveoretinitis 610–12
vascular effects 213–20
see also cannabinoids; and individual
phytocannabinoids
phytocannabinoid addiction 175–7
brain sites of action 177
cannabidiol 180
conditioned place preference 176
NAc dopamine elevation 175
self-administration in animal models 176–7
tetrahydrocannabivarin 180
VTA-MFB-NAc reward encoding neural axis
176
VTA-NAc core reward encoding neural axis 175
phytosterols 283
pine nuts 286
pinene 282, 283, 286, 287
Piper nigrum 288
pistachio nuts 286
plant development 74–84
autoflowering cannabis 80
biocontrol 81
floral development 76–8
growing temperature 81
growth medium 81
harvest and drying 82–3
indoor cultivation 74–84
irradiance level and cannabinoid yield 78–81
mother plant stock 76
natural outdoor cultivation 74
plant nutrition 82
processing 83
selection of best genetic material 75
thigmomorphogenesis 76
vegetative growth 75
plant nutrition 82
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) 283
polyketide pathway 93
polypharmacy 283, 288
pontine reticular formation 539
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS)
531
posterior segment intraocular inflammation see
uveoretinitis
postoperative pain 420
posttraumatic stress disorder 191–2, 398
pot 654
PPAR 510
PPARα 230
PPARγ 230
cannabidiol interaction 147
vascular response to THC 216
Prain, David 284–5
pravadoline 712
preclinical data

anticonvulsant activity 551–2
antitumor activity 629
designer drugs 716–17
schizophrenia 528–30
pregnancy
adverse effects on 675, 679–80
cannabis use 253–6
6-prenylapigenin 16
prepulse inhibition 529–30
prescribing
breakthrough pain and spasms 426
comparative doses 426
discontinuation 427–8
dronabinol 425
foreign travel 428
hospital admission 428
long-term use 428–9
nabilone 425
outcome assessment 427
overdose/overload 426–7
Sativex 425–6
see also medical use
pristimerin 288
production procedures 92–3
progesterone 17α-hydroxylase 141
prohibition, harms of 683–4, 702
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 283
protein kinases 508
pruritus 395, 403
psoriasis 589, 591
psychoactive cannabinoids 47
medical use 393–415
see also specific products
psychological effects of cannabis
amnesia 423
anxiety and depression 652–3
euphoria 422
neurocognitive 652
psychosis and schizophrenia 423, 650–2,
661–73
psychomotor performance 675, 676
psychosis 423, 650–2
and cannabis use 665–7, 699–700
electrophysiological studies 665
functional MRI studies 665–6
neurochemical imaging studies 666
and schizophrenia risk 664
transient 661
see also schizophrenia
Purple Haze 654

®

Q
quality control 332–3
marketing authorisation 362–3
Quantisal collection device 303, 304
quercetin 283
quinine 280

™

R
R-(+)-WIN55212 120, 127, 128, 143
ranibizumab (Lucentis ) 608–9
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep 538

®

743

744

INDEX

reactive oxygen species (ROS) 250–1, 508
receptors 115–16, 261
bioassays for activation 116–18
cardiovascular system 215–16
receptors (continued)
CB1 see CB1 receptors
CB2 see CB2 receptors
distribution 157–9
gastrointestinal system 227–8
Ki values 117
nervous system 157–9
in peripheral analgesia 589
skin 586–7, 589
see also pharmacology; and individual cannabinoids
receptor interactions 157
cannabichromene 139
cannabidiol 139, 143–4
cannabidiolic acid 139
cannabidivarin 139
cannabigerol 148–50
cannabigerolic acid 149
cannabigevarin 149
cannabinol 228
tetrahydrocannabinol 227–8
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid 149
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid 149
receptor-independent actions
phytocannabinoids 510–11
tetrahydrocannabinol 120–3
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarin 129
recreational use
cannabis strain 654–5
designer drugs 713–14
desired effects 647–9
individual variation 653–4
undesired effects see adverse effects
rectal administration 299–300
reefers 654
regulatory issues 364–70
dronabinol 374
Marketing Authorisation Application 362–70
nabilone 377
Sativex 379
see also specific laws and regulations
reproductive effects 245–61
biological basis 247–9
cannabis as aphrodisiac 245–7, 250
men 249–51
pregnancy 253–6
women 251–6
respiratory risk 696–7
reduction of 697–8
Rick Simpson oil 331
rimonabant 508
route of administration 328–9, 416–18
biochemistry 329
oral 299, 330–1, 417
rectal 299–300
smoking 296–9, 416
sublingual/dermal 300, 331–2, 417–18
vaporization 330, 416–17
Royal Opium Commission 45

®

S
safety 358–60, 363, 370
dronabinol 376, 377
nabilone 378
Sativex 370, 384
San Francisco Patients Resource Center (SPARC) 345
Santa Clara Medical Cannabis Center 342
Sativex 54, 65–6, 72, 98, 193, 288, 305, 322, 358,
364–70, 378–88, 417
abuse liability 384–6
adverse effects 384, 422
Alzheimer’s disease 516
clinical trials see clinical trials
efficacy 369, 380–3
patient-reported outcome measures 382–3
pharmacokinetics 308–10
prescribing 425–6
production 84, 105
quality control 83–4
regulatory issues 379
safety 370, 384
scheduling 48, 54
schizophrenia 526–37, 650–2, 661–73
age of cannabis use onset 663
animal models 527, 528–30
cannabis as risk factor 662–3
and cannabis use 661–5, 699–700
clinical studies 403, 530–2
heavy cannabis use and addiction 664
hyperactivity and stereotypy 528–9
mechanism of drug action 532–3
preclinical data 528–30
strength of association 662
susceptibility genes 663
type of cannabis used 663–4
scleroderma 594
secondary metabolites see cannabinoids
seizures see epilepsy
self-medication 319–38
administration forms 328–9
choice of varieties 325–6
clinical research 324–5
costs and reimbursement 328
definition 321–2
Dutch medicinal cannabis program 323–4
IACM survey 323
illicit sources 418
oral administration 299, 330–2, 417
patient characterization 322–5
physician’s role 326–7
quality control 332–3
reasons for 325–8
smoking 296–9, 329–30, 416
social aspects 327–8
sensemilla see skunk
Sensi 654
sepsis 570–2
serotonin receptors
cannabidiol 144–7
cannabidiolic acid 140, 147–8
cannabigerol 149–50
Serturner, Friedrich 45

®

®

INDEX

sesquicannabigerol 8
sesquiterpenoids 67, 78, 93, 281, 282, 283
sexual dysfunction, dronabinol 404
sexuality, cannabinoid effects
men 249–51
women 251–2
side effects see adverse effects
Sinemet 283
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs (1961) 47–8, 361
sinsemilla cannabis 74, 76, 281, 661
β-sitosteryl-3-O-β-d-glucopyranoside-2'-O-palamite 16
skin
adverse effects 675, 681
anatomy/histology 582–5
CB receptors 586–7, 589
dermal administration 300, 331–2, 417–18
dermis 584–5
endocannabinoids in 587–8
enzymes in 587
epidermis 583–4
physiology 585
skin disorders 582–600
acne vulgaris 594–5
atopic dermatitis 592–3
contact allergic dermatitis 593–4
melanoma 591–2
psoriasis 589, 591
scleroderma 594
skin carcinomas 592
Skunk 98, 654, 655, 661
sleep 538
K complexes 538
phytocannabinoids and 541–2
rapid eye movement (REM) 538
sleep disorders 420, 538–46
dyssomnias 540
insomnia and somnolence 540–1
parasomnias 540
sleep-wake cycle 539
smoking 296–9, 329–30, 416
cardiovascular risks 697
respiratory risks 696–7
risks of 682
Solanum berthaultii 72
somnolence 540–1
spasticity see multiple sclerosis
Spice 661, 718
spinal injury 395, 398, 511–12
α-spinasterol 16
spiroindans 17–18
stereotypy 528–9
steroids 16
storefront distribution 344–5
Stribild 58
structure-activity relationships 713
sublingual administration 300, 331–2, 417–18
Substance Abuse Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA) 303
Suncus murinus (house musk shrew) 145, 436, 438,
439, 442, 444, 445
superoxide dismutase 141, 516
sweat, cannabinoids in 307

®

®

synaptic transmission
cannabinoid effects 159–61
phytocannabinoid effects 162–6
synthetic cannabinoids see designer drugs
T
T lymphocytes 263, 265–7
T-helper cells 263
taxonomy 89–91
teas 330–1
temozolomide 635
terebinth resin 286
terpenoids 73, 281, 282, 287
terpenophenolics 93
terpenyl-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolate 5, 6
terpinenol 283
testosterone 6β-hydroxylase 141
testosterone 16α-hydroxylase 141
tetanus 30–1
tetrahydrocannabinol 4–5, 67, 261
absorption 296–300
addiction 175–7
agonist activity 118–19
analgesia 473–4
antagonist activity 120
anticonvulsant activity 552–5
antiemesis 438–40, 441–2
appetite stimulation 455–7
cancer therapy 635–6
cardiovascular effects 210–12, 216–17
central nervous system effects 162
chemical structure 116, 158, 542, 711
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
438–9
content 90, 92
diabetes 568–9
distribution 300–1
driving impairment 693
elimination 302–3
high-content products, risk reduction
701–2
in inflorescence material 77
isolation of 280
Ki value 117
metabolism 301–2
myocardial infarction 677
oral administration 299
oral fluid levels 305, 306
partial agonist activity 119–20
peripheral nervous system effects 162, 166
pharmacokinetics 296–303
pharmacology 118–23, 125, 126
phenotype 98
plasma levels 305, 309
receptor interactions 227–8
receptor-independent actions 120–3
rectal administration 299–300
research 286
scheduling 48, 49, 54
skin disorders 590
and sleep 541, 542
smoked administration 296–9

745

746

INDEX

sublingual and dermal administration 300
synaptic transmission effects 162–6
synthetic see dronabinol
vasoconstriction 217–18
vasorelaxation 213–16
Δ8-tetrahydrocannabinol 4, 7
chemical structure 116, 158
Ki value 117
pharmacology 123–4
Δ9-cis-(6aS,10aR)-tetrahydrocannabinol 14
10-OXO-Δ6a(10a)-tetrahydrocannabinol 14
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid 72, 93
antiemesis 442–3
chemical structure 138
enzyme interactions 140
pharmacology 150
receptor interactions 149
tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV) 92, 94
addiction 180
analgesia 478–9
anticonvulsant activity 557
antiemesis 443
appetite regulation 464
CB1 antagonist activity 127–9
CB2 partial agonist activity 126–7
chemical structure 116, 158
and hypophagia 568
Ki value 117
pharmacology 126–9
receptor-independent actions 129
research 286
synaptic transmission effects 166
vascular effects 220
Δ8-tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid 572
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid 94, 331
chemical structure 138
pharmacology 150
receptor interactions 149
1,3,6,7-tetrahydroxy-2-C-β-D-glucopyranosyl
xanthone 18
tetraketide synthase 93
Thai Stick 654
THC see tetrahydrocannabinol
THCV see tetrahydrocannabivarin
THCVA see tetrahydrocannabivarinic acid
therapeutic synergy
additivity and antagonism 283–4
combinatorial 284–6
research 286–8
thigmomorphogenesis 76
Thrips tobaci (tobacco thrip) 72
tinctures 331–2
tinnitus 30
tobacco thrip (Thrips tobaci) 72
Tourette’s syndrome 324, 403
toxicity 674–5
treatment with citrus fruit extracts 285
toxicology 717
traffic accidents see driving impairment
(±)-Δ7-trans-(1R,3R,6R)isotetrahydrocannabinol-C5 14
(±)-Δ7-trans-(1R,3R,6R)isotetrahydrocannabivarin-C3 14

(±)-6,7-trans-epoxycannabigerol 8
(±)-6,7-trans-epoxycannabigerolic acid 8
transient receptor potential channels see TRP
channels
transporters, cannabinoid effects on 142
traumatic brain injury 621
Treponema pallidum 270
trichotillomania 395, 404
trichromes 67–74, 96
bulbous 72–3
capitate sessile 68–9
capitate stalked 69–72
cystolythic 68
isolation for pharmaceutical use 73–4
peltate 69
simple unicellular 68
TRP channels
cannabidiol interaction 147
gastrointestinal system 229–30
TRP vanilloid type-1 cation channel see TRPV1
channel
TRPV1 channel 602–3
tumor necrosis factor-α 268, 607
U
UK
attitudes to cannabis 44–5
Committee on Safety of Drugs 357
medical use of cannabinoids 415–33
Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory
Agency 58
Misuse of Drug Regulations 48
Misuse of Drugs Act (1971) 48, 51, 65, 361
Pharmaceutical Society 46
Pharmacy Act (1868) 46
United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances (1988) 49
Convention on Psychotropic Substances
(1971) 47–8
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs (1961) 47–8,
361
upper motor neuron disease 395, 398
uracil 18
urine, cannabinoids in 311–12
USA
Californian distribution model 346–7
cannabis buyers’ clubs 328
cannabis dispensaries 340–3
Center of Drug Evaluation and Research 364
Controlled Substances Act 48, 51
Federal Food, Drugs and Cosmetic Act (1938)
357
Food and Drug Administration 54, 58, 327, 364
New Mexico/Maine/Colorado distribution
model 348–9
Oregon/Washington distribution model 347
Proposition 215 341–2
San Francisco Patients Resource Center
(SPARC) 345
Santa Clara Medical Cannabis Center 342
Wo/men’s Alliance for Medical Marijuana
(WAMM) 346

INDEX

uveoretinitis 610–12
clinical features 610–11
future directions 612
phytocannabinoids in 611–12

vomiting, cannabis-induced 678
VTA see ventral tegmental area
VTA-MFB-NAc reward encoding neural axis 176
VTA-NAc core reward encoding neural axis 175

V
vaporization 329–30, 416–17, 697–8
vascular effects 213–19
cell lines 220
time-dependent responses 216–17
vasoconstriction 217–18
vasorelaxation 213–16
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 632
vasoconstriction 217–18
vasorelaxation 213–16
cannabinoid receptors 215–16
endothelium 215
ion channel modulation 216
metabolism 213–14
sensory nerves 214–15
vegetative growth 75
ventral tegmental area (VTA) 173
vertical integration 348–9
viral infections, resistance to 269–70
visceral sensation 233, 236–7
Volcano vaporizer 323, 697

W
weed 654
weight gain 424
White Widow 98, 325
Whittle, Brian 288
WIN 48,098 712
WIN 55,212-2 712
see also R-(+)-WIN55212; WIN 55212-2;
WIN55212-2
WIN 55212-2 629, 633
WIN 55,225 712
WIN 55212-2 160
Wo/men’s Alliance for Medical Marijuana
(WAMM) 346
women, cannabis effects
reproductive system 251–6
sexuality 251–2
World Health Organization 47
X
xanthones 18

747

