-c^’K^ii/ '
•$»

*jPSr*

^fil'fi; >•-

.

IRcnESi
? 4r$fl£5ai
* £v,% »’'
|§£f|

p.

HrsMnt,

iSt-.

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2018 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation

*

https://archive.org/details/cannabisindicaesOOOOoner

i N DI (■■

The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains

Edited by S.T. Oner
With an introduction
by Mel Thomas

Volume

2
CIRCULATING WITH THE LISTED PROBLEMS(S):
wet

Lw p0N

GREEN CANDY PRESS

Cannabis Indica:
The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
Published by Green Candy Press
San Francisco, CA
Copyright © 2013 Green Candy Press
ISBN 978-1-937866-01-3
Photographs © 420Clones.com, Advanced Seeds, AlphaKronik Genetics, Alpine Seeds, ASG
Seeds, Autofem Seeds, BC Bud Depot, Big Buddha Seeds, BillBerry Farms, Blim Burn Seeds,
Bonguru Seeds, Bortnick Farms, Buddha Seeds, Bumboklot Seeds, Cali Gold Genetics,
CannaBioGen, Ch9 Female Seeds, Core Seeds, David Strange, De Sjamaan Seeds, Delta 9
Labs, Dinafem Seeds, DJ Short Seeds, DNA Genetics, Don’t Panic Organix, Dr. Canem and
Company, Dr. Greenthumb Seeds, Dr. Underground, Dready Bob, Dready Seeds, Dutch Pas¬
sion, Dynasty Seeds, E.K., Eddie Funxta, Emerald Triangle Seeds, Eva Female Seeds, Evil
Seeds, Female Seeds, Finest Medicinal Seeds, Flying Dutchmen, Gage Green Genetics, Ganja
Creator Genetics, Ganjah Seeds, Gean Pool, Gibridov.net, Green Born Identity, Green Haven
Genetics, Green House Seed Co., Green Life Medical Center, Greenlife Seeds, Greenman420,
Hero Seeds, High Bred Seeds by The Joint Doctor, Holy Smoke Seeds, Homegrown Fantaseeds, HortiLab Seed Company, Howard Marks, Humber Valley Seeds, Illuminati Seeds,
Inkognyto, IrieVibe Seeds, Jason, Jeffman, Jin Albrecht, JojoRizo (R.I.P.), Kannabia Seeds,
Karmaceuticals, LLC, Kaya, Kerala, Kingdom Organic Seeds, Kyle Kushman, Lowlife Seeds,
Magus Genetics, Mandala Seeds, Marijuana Hillbilly, Marijuana Max, Master Thai Seeds, MG
Imaging, MGM Genetics, Ministry of Cannabis, MoD, Moonunit, Mosca Seeds, Mr. Nice Seeds,
N. Gonzalez, Next Generation Seed Company, North of Seeds, OG Genetics, OGA Seeds,
Paradise Seeds, Peak Seeds BC, Philosopher Seeds, Pitt Bully Seeds, Poor White Farmer
Seeds, Positronics Seeds, Red Star Farms, Reserva Privada, Resin Seeds, Ringo, Riot Seeds,
Rokerij Seeds, Royal Queen Seeds, S.Core, Sagarmatha Seeds, Samsara Seeds, Seedsman,
Sensi Seeds, Serious Seeds, Shantibaba, Slayer, SoHum Seeds, Soma Seeds, Southbay Ray,
Southern Star Seeds, Spliff Seeds, Stoney Girl Gardens, Subcool and Team Green Avengers,
Supreme Beans, Team Chronic Avengers, Team31.net, TH Seeds, The Blazing Pistileros, The
Bulldog Seeds, The Rev, The Wizards of Oz, Tiki Seedbank, TreeTown Seeds, Ultimate Seeds,
Underground Originals, Vulkania Seeds, Wally Duck, Weed.co.za, World of Seeds.
Cover photo: Purple Ryder is courtesy and Copyright © David Strange and High Bred Seeds
by The Joint Doctor.
This book contains information about illegal substances, specifically the plant Cannabis and its
derivative products. Green Candy Press would like to emphasize that Cannabis is a controlled
substance in North America and throughout much of the world. As such, the use and cultivation
of cannabis can carry heavy penalties that may threaten an individual's liberty and livelihood.
The aim of the Publisher is to educate and entertain. Whatever the Publisher's view on the
validity of current legislation, we do not in any way condone the use of prohibited substances.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without express written
permission from the Publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages or repro¬
duce illustrations in a review where appropriate credit is given. Nor may any part of this book
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means with¬
out written permission from the Publisher.
Printed in China by Oceanic Graphic Printing
Sometimes Massively Distributed by P.G.W.

Dedication
by S.T. Oner

"Mistrust those in whom the urge to punish is strong."
— Friedrich Nietzsche

As always, I wholeheartedly dedicate this book to the fine people at NORML and everyone
who has fought for cannabis legalization. It seems to me that success is just around the
corner, and with every new State that passes pro medical marijuana laws, our goal comes
ever closer. Although there will always be those who seek to punish us for enjoying this
plant, I sincerely believe that these people will be in the minority sooner rather than later.
Following the popularity of the first two books in this series, Cannabis Indica, Vol.

1 and Cannabis Sativa, Vol. 1, my thanks go out to everyone involved in this project.
I continue to be humbled by the public’s support of my books, and I thank you all for
allowing me to continue with this adventure. My dream is for someone to read these
books in 20 years and recognize the great work produced in our lifetimes.
Thanks go to the fantastic breeders, growers and seed companies who appear
here. I wouldn’t be able to create a book like this without your incredible support and
your brilliant work. This volume features breeders from the USA, Australia, Belgium,
Britain, Canada, France, Holland, New Zealand, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Switzer¬
land and others that we can’t legally mention.
There are some contributors who wish to remain anonymous, but who deserve
recognition and respect nonetheless, as does everyone on the online forums, espe¬
cially the fine people at Breedbay.co.uk, Meduser.ca, Riotseeds.nl and Seedfinder.eu
Finally, I must thank the growers, breeders and writers who inspired me to learn
more about this incredible plant: Danny Danko, Ed Rosenthal, Greg Green, Grubbycup Stash, Jason King, Jeff Mowta, Jorge Cervantes, Matt Mernagh, Mel Thomas,
Mel Frank, Nico Escondido and The Rev are some big ones, and of course the un¬
forgettable Jack Herer, may he never be forgotten. I am honored to join you guys in
helping to produce memorable works of literature for the global cannabis community.
I feel that Cannabis Indica, Vol. 2 is a valuable addition to the canon of marijuana lit¬
erature and offers a true glimpse at the genetic potential of the cannabis plant. Were
it not for the hard work and sacrifices of the people featured in these pages, a book
like this could not exist. For this, I say thank you.

Contents

Preface

vii

G-13 Skunk (IBL).48

Introduction

xiii

Grape Diesel.*.50

1

Grape Escape.52

Afghan Mountain Black.2

Grapefruit Diesel.54

Auto Stoned.4

Green Shark.56

Berreck.....6

Hash Plant.58

Black Karma Kush.8

Heaven.60

Blue Angel.10

Hellriser.62

Blue Dot.12

Herijuana Jack 33.64

B'ue Magoo.14

Hindu Kush Auto.66

Bubba Kush.16

Holland’s Hope.68

Canna Sutra.18

ICE.70

Caramelice.20

Ice Cream.72

Cherry Cheese x G-13.

22

Iranian G-13.74

Cherry Hemmingway.24

Irukandji.76

Chronic.26

Jackpot Royale.78

Colorado Kool-Aid.28

Jade Superfrosty.80

Cripit.30

Kandy Kush.82

Delirium.32

Kushman’s Silverback Grape Ape.84

Dready Auto Jack.34

L.A. Ultra x Bubblicious.86

Dutch Delight.36

Lady Purple.88

Fayaka.38

Lavender.90

Forfiter Special..40

Lebanese Bekaa.92

Fruit Spirit.42

Lebanese Landrace.94

Funxta’z Get Rite.44

Mango.

G-Bomb.46

Master Thai’s Green Dragon BX7.98

Cannabis Indica

96

Mau-Mau.100

Slyder.152

Meen Green Hillbilly.102

Smile.154

Melon Gum.104

Snow White.156

Mind Body and Soul (MBS).106

Special Kannabia.158

Molokai Frost.108

Spiritual Punk.160

Narkosis.110

StarBerry.162

Nice Chunk.112

Sugar Loaf.164

O.Z. Kush.114

The Beast.166

Pacific Coast Kush..116

The Hog.168

Papa’s Candy.118

The Purps.

Point of No Return.

120

Thunderbud.172

Pollen Chuck.122

Tingo Sour Kush.174

Purple Afghani.

124

Top 69.176

Purple Elegance.

126

Tsi Fly.178

Purple Fuck V2.128

Vanilluna.180

Purple Kush x Blue Apollo.130

Viuda Blanca.182

Purple Ryder.132

Warlock.184

Querkle.134

Westside.186

Rock Star.136

White Afghan.188

Rocklock.

138

White Dwarf.190

Royal Purple Kush.140

White Siberian.192

Shishkaberry.142

Wild Zombie.194

Siberian Queen.144

Zei.196

SkaSkunk.146

Zensation.198

Skunk NL.148

Zindica.200

Skunkberry.150

Index

170

202

V

Preface

Cannabis Indica:
An Essential Plant

First of all, I have to say Thank You.
Since my first strain guide, Cannabis Indica: The Essential Guide to the World’s

Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 1 came out in 2011, I have experienced a level of
support from the cannabis community that I never could have expected. Not only did
so many people read the book that it knocked my socks off, many fans have even
written to me personally with letters and emails and through Facebook to express
their interest in the guides. I’ve had people sending me pictures of the first Cannabis
Indica book, and my second book in the series, Cannabis Sativa: The Essential Guide

to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 1, poking out of giant bags of bud,
being read by their pets and even posing in front of famous monuments all over the
world. They’ve told me how the books helped them choose a suitable medical strain
for their particular condition, how they were introduced to new breeders they’d never
heard of and how they picked up a copy every time they got high, just to look at the
“pot porn” shots within. Every time I hear from a reader, it makes me smile over my
morning coffee and bowl of Blueberry Haze, and gives me a buzz greater than the
one I get from the weed.
Of course, the breeders also deserve my unconditional respect. From Spain’s Dinafem to Australia’s Southern Star Seeds, through the USAs Master Thai and Switzer¬
land’s Tiki Seedbank, every single seed company found within these pages is doing
phenomenal work and helping both medical users and recreational tokers in their re¬
spective countries and beyond. The teamwork I see from breeders living in different

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
VII

Preface

countries and on different continents always astounds me, and furthers my belief that
the worldwide cannabis movement is one of the most cohesive and powerful on the
planet. With people all over the globe doing such amazing work, we cannot fail to win
the war to protect this most sacred of plants.
As ever, in this guide I have tried to represent every corner of the cannabis com¬
munity. From multinational seed companies to the secret breeder that lives next door,
every type of person who dabbles with the genetics of our favorite plant is featured in
these pages. I have been so happy to make connections with even more private
breeders in the last year, and the effort that these guys and girls put into growing fas¬
cinating new plants never ceases to amaze me. At first glance, it may seem as if pri¬
vate breeders and large seed companies are playing different games altogether, but
in fact, they are two sides of the same coin. Without the larger companies, we would
not have the building blocks that many of the most new and innovative hybrids are
created from. Without Sensi Seeds’ Afghani #1 plant, we would not have TreeTown
Seeds’ Purple Afghani, and without Lavender by Soma Seeds, Melon Gum by Spain’s
Dr. Underground could not exist. By the same maxim, if it were not for the amazing
innovations of such breeders as the Joint Doctor and DNA Genetics, the larger com¬
panies would have room to rest on their laurels and the breeding game would stag¬
nate. The big companies and the independent breeders exist in a symbiotic
relationship, just like humans do with plants: without one, the other cannot exist.
As well as the top companies and independent breeders, I’ve also had the oppor¬
tunity to feature genetics and breeders from some new countries. Thanks to the suc¬
cess of Cannabis Indica, Vol. 1 and Cannabis Sativa, Vol. 1, fantastic growers and
breeders from such countries as Belgium, Russia and South Africa have sought me
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
vm

out and expressed interest in being a part of this fantastic grassroots venture. I’ve
also managed to find strains that encompass genetics from every part of the world,
and, for the first time, this strain guide features genetics from as far away as Bhutan,
Turkey, Lebanon and Laos. Every region has its own interesting and diverse array of
cannabis genetics, and it is my honor and privilege to help showcase them to the
world. Only in a book like this could you see landrace Lebanese genetics from the
Bekaa Valley being preserved and experimented with by a breeder’s collective in
South Africa. Talk about the global cannabis community!
I’m especially excited to be able to include a very awesome and very elusive Amer¬
ican strain in this volume: the enigmatic Zindica from the USA’s Bumboklot Seeds.
This particular strain was an underground sensation on Overgrow and then disap¬
peared as quickly as it came. It is a beautiful plant with a great smoke, and any
cannabis connoisseur has at least heard its name, even if they haven’t had the pleas¬
ure of tasting its super smooth smoke. I’ve been able to include even more fantastic
North American breeders and their genetics in this volume of the Cannabis Indica se¬
ries, more in fact than any other strain guide ever created. This is both a testament
to the ever-growing North American cannabis scene and the popularity of the first two
books, and I hope that this trend can continue!
I’m also thrilled to have the wonderful grower, fantastic raconteur and all round
great guy Mel Thomas involved in this project, and am very thankful that he agreed
to pen the introduction to this strain guide. Mel’s book Cannabis Cultivation: A Com¬

plete Grower’s Guide formed an integral part of my grower’s education and I still con¬
tinue to learn from it now; after all, a man who was named as “a horticultural expert
involved in a resolute and successful attempt to grow marijuana on a commercial
Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
IX

Preface

scale” - by the judge who threw him in jail, nonetheless - has a lot to teach us all!
It feels good to be back here exploring the best of indica once again. Indica means
many different things to many different people, but to me, indica is like an old friend.
While sativa is the excitable, energetic young rascal who drags me to parties that I’m
far too old to go to and sends me roaring down a hill on a skateboard that I’m almost
certainly going to fly off of at some point, indica is the buddy that I can kick back with
at the end of a long and stressful day. Indica is there to calm my nerves when the
world kicks my ass and I need to let off some steam. Indica is there to remind me of
why Beavis and Butthead is so damn funny, and to remind me of my younger days
when I was green and stupid enough to do the things I wish I could do now.
For some people, indica is even more important: for them, indica is their pain re¬
liever, the thing that dulls their pain enough to get them to sleep at night. Indica helps
their aching bodies get up and out to work, and eases the pain in their arms enough
to let them pick up their kids. It brings back the hunger that chemotherapy has robbed
them of, and gives their bodies enough energy to fight through to another day.
Many of the strains featured in this book have been used by patients as alterna¬
tives to the liver-destroying pharmaceutical medications that had previously ruled their
lives. The medicinal benefits of indica strains for conditions that cause chronic pain
is undeniable, and I give thanks that an increasing amount of influential doctors are
publicly stating this. The number of studies on this subject is also rising, meaning that
the pressure on non-smokers and officials to acknowledge cannabis indica’s potential
medical uses is also increasing. For those who rely on indica strains to manage their
medical problems, this is a huge step forward, and should be welcomed by everyone
who smokes - medically or recreationally - as it will also help to change the negative
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
x

attitudes that consider cannabis to be “a bad thing.” While we may all know that
cannabis is one of the most natural and most safe medicines available, the general
public has been subjected to decades of willful misinformation, and only now is the
truth coming out.
We are close to seeing the tide turn in our favor. With more and more reasons to
legalize cannabis, it is becoming more and more difficult for politicians to turn a blind
eye to the role this plant can play in medicine, therapy, industry and economy. It’s
sometimes too easy to forget that nations originally formed their governments to look
after the people; to create laws and statutes that would adhere to the nation’s wants
and beliefs, and to keep them safe. George Washington himself said, “The basis of
our political system is the right of the people to make and to alter their constitutions
of government.” Now that Western nations are again realizing the power that the peo¬
ple have, and realizing the rights that have been taken away from them, governments
are being forced to realize it, too. When the people rise up and decide to change
things, things inevitably change. Because of this, the overwhelming support for the
legalization of cannabis will, I’m sure, result in that goal being reached.
In the words of Frederick Douglass, “If there is no struggle, there is no progress.”

Keep struggling, my friends.

- S.T. Oner

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
X!

Introduction

What the Kush?
A History of the

Cannabis Indica
Plant
By Mel Thomas
In 1783, a French botanist called Jean-Baptiste Lamarck published the description of
a second species of the cannabis plant in his book Encyclopedia. Lamarck noted that
the species Cannabis sativa, normally grown for fiber and textile use, was character¬
ized by a height of 12 to 16 feet, long stalks, sparse foliage, and slender leaves.
Cannabis plants native to India, on the other hand, were typically 4 to 5 feet tall at
maturity and densely foliated with bushy clusters of comparatively broad leaves; as
these plants originated from India, he named them Cannabis indica L.
Curious about the origins of the Cannabis indica plant I recently decided to spend a
few months traveling in India. I had experienced pure Cannabis sativa buds in Thailand
many years ago and I was interested in finding some pure indica buds at source. India
is a strange place with a very diverse culture and they still use Cannabis indica in reli¬
gious ceremonies to this day. Shiva devotees, known as sadhus, can often be seen
traveling around the towns and villages smoking charas from clay chillum pipes. India
is also a great place to lose weight; I ate a local fish curry and lost 2 lbs. in four days.
My expedition to find the prized Cannabis indica buds was a little disappointing to
say the least. They traditionally make hand-rubbed charas hashish from their crops
and they have no concept of drying and curing the indica buds themselves for con¬
sumption. It just seemed like a waste of good buds to me, as the charas varied in
quality and even in the north of India I found it was quite harsh to smoke. The hash
was very black and slightly pliable, and the herbal cannabis available was not much
better. Generally, the bud consisted of seeded flowers that were of poor quality. I soon

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
XIII

Introduction
got the measure of the place and asked a friend who spends a lot of time out there
where I could score some good hash. He replied that he would get it for me, explain¬
ing, “They like me so they will cheat me less.”
I did manage to find some decent indica buds when I visited Goa, but they were
from an Austrian guy who grew a small crop every year and paid bribes, known as
“baksheesh,” to the local police in return for them leaving him alone. I had found myself
staying in a small village near a town called Chowdi and it just happened to coincide
with the Hindu Holi celebration, which was amazing to watch. During the festivities the
Indians throw brightly colored dye at each other and then celebrate in the evening by
feasting at each other’s houses as all the men of the village go from house to house
drumming, chanting and dancing. That evening I sat cross-legged on a floor made
from dried cow shit, which passes for concrete in rural India, and, leaning back against
a coconut tree, I smoked the pure indica from a clay chillum pipe whilst the sound of
drums echoed through the village. It had a strong but indistinct flavor and was certainly
a very stoned and chilled experience, but not any different to the strains we now have
in the West, which is a testament to the quality of Cannabis indica strains available
today. All of the excellent plants listed in this edition carry a variation of these indica
genes and have a powerful indica stoned effect combined with differing flavors and
aromas ranging from pungent skunk to sweet and fruity, depending on the variety.
Although indica is classified as a subspecies of Cannabis sativa, recent studies
have led researchers to believe that the opposite is probably true and it is now thought
that Cannabis indica was the first to evolve. More confusingly, many now believe that
the sativa vs. indica theory is incorrect, arguing that drug strains of cannabis are: indica,
afghanica or kafiristanica, whilst Cannabis sativa is primarily grown for fiber. In India,
Afghanistan and Pakistan Cannabis indicas are traditionally cultivated for the produc¬
tion of hashish, whilst sativas are mainly grown for seeds, fiber or sinsemilla buds,
which are not processed into hashish. According to the latest studies, what are now
commonly called sativas are actually indicas, whilst what we today call indicas are in
fact afghanicas.1 Modern hybridization has altered the natural development of the
cannabis plant as breeders have sought to promote particular traits, blurring the dis¬
tinction between the two primary species. However, these natural tendencies remain

1 McPartland, J. The Medicinal Uses of Cannabis and Cannabinoids, Pharmaceutical
Press, 2004: Chapter 4, pp. 74-78.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
xiv

visible and hybridized plants tend to take on the traits of either indica or sativa strains,
depending on which genes are most dominant in the parent plants.
Although Cannabis indica refers to Indian-cultivated cannabis, the Afghani indicas
were traditionally grown throughout Afghanistan. Whilst many crops were cultivated
in the foothills or lowlands, a large number were also grown in the Hindu Kush Moun¬
tain regions. This mountain range is between the two countries and Kush weed is
thought to be a natural hybrid of afghanica and indica plants caused by airborne pol¬
lination. What we now know as Cannabis indica originated from these mountainous
regions of the Asian subcontinent, which also include Karakoram in northern India,
Tibet, Nepal, Bhutan and of course the Hindu Kush mountains in Pakistan and
Afghanistan. The Hindu Kush forms part of the Himalayas and the indica plant thrives
in this harsh and unforgiving environment comprised of extremely cold winters and
hot, dry summers. Cannabis indica plants have adapted to this challenging environ¬
ment by producing short, bushy plants that mature earlier than sativas and interest¬
ingly also have more chlorophyll and less accessory pigment to protect the plant from
excessive sunlight. As indica strains have more chlorophyll than sativas they grow
and mature faster making them well suited for cultivation in temperate climates.
At the highest point in the Himalayas lies the capital of the Chitral District, situated
on the western bank of the Chitral River in Pakistan. The town is at the foot of Tirich
Mir, the highest peak of the Hindu Kush, and has a dry, almost Mediterranean climate
with little rainfall during the very hot summers. The purebred indica strains from this
region such as Chitral Kush, the X-18 from Tom Hill and the X-18 Pure Pakistani from
Reserva Privada (featured in the first volume of this series) are excellent plants that
look similar to Hindu Kush cultivars and have a very characteristic indica leaf shape
with a green-bluish color that proves their authenticity. These are perhaps some of
the best known of the pure Pakistani varieties available today, along with lowland cul¬
tivars from the Kashmir Valley such as Vanilla Kush from Barney’s Farm, which is an
indica-dominant strain whose genetics originate from Kashmir and Afghanistan. There
are also other indica-dominant hybrids available such as Mountain Mist, which is a
cross between Skunk and a Himalayan Indica.
Not only can indica plants survive the cold, but they are also extremely mold resist¬
ant and can withstand heavy nighttime condensation. Purple Kush and other highly
regarded strains available today all have Pakistani genetics and many of these old in¬
dica strains have been preserved in the United States since the late 1970s, particularly

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
XV

iV[.V;-J-<

sspiBji

& .-• £

W*«

Introduction
BS88«iBBaBS8BBg»g8aags«flBiig8S8asBg8«s«^^

in California. Kafiristanica is said to have evolved from feral indica plants that had es¬
caped from plantations in northern India and in 1929, the Russian botanist Nikolai Vav¬
ilov assigned wild or feral populations of Cannabis indica in Afghanistan to the group
C. indica Lam. var. kafiristanica Vav. Both indica and sativa plants can be high in THC;
however, cultivated indica strains normally have higher levels of CBD and CBN,
whereas wild or feral plants generally display a relatively high CBD content. The higher
amount of CBD contained in Cannabis indica means that when compared to a sativa,
the effects of THC are significantly altered. Whereas Cannabis sativa plants are well
known for causing a cerebral high, indica varieties have a more sedative effect on the
user and indicas are highly recommended for the medicinal properties of their flowers.
Indica strains are extremely effective at treating the symptoms of medical condi¬
tions such as anxiety, chronic pain, insomnia, muscle spasms, spasticity in multiple
sclerosis, Alzheimer’s disease, cancer, HIV/AIDS and tremors caused by Parkinson’s
syndrome. Indica plants have a higher level of cannabinoids than sativas, which re¬
sults in a more sedated, relaxed effect on the patient and for this reason many prefer
to medicate in the evening. Hybrids of indica and sativa strains can be of enormous
benefit to marijuana patients as the resultant plants carry some characteristics from
each parent. By adding sativa genetics to indica strains, breeders can produce a plant
that has less of a sedative effect on the user and by adding indica to sativa strains,
breeders can decrease the sativa tendency to encourage anxiety in some users. Pop¬
ular strains for medical use include Chronic by Serious Seeds, G-13 Skunk by Mr.
Nice Seeds, and Hash Plant by Sensi Seeds.
Indica dominant plants can also be found in northern parts of India, Nepal and
Tibet. Other indicas come from the Chinese province of Xinjiang that borders the Hi¬
malayas, however, the plants from the southern Chinese provinces of Yunnan and
Sichuan are considered to be hybrid varieties of indica and sativa. To the north of
Afghanistan are regions that were once part of the former Soviet Union and before
that, Turkestan. Cannabis is still traditionally cultivated in these areas, and some of
the best indica plants from this region come from Uzbekistan. Cannabis indica can
also be found in the Middle East and North Africa, particularly Morocco; plants that
are more sativa-like in appearance are generally found further south of these areas.
In the United States, during the early 1970s, people were predominately smoking
South America sativa smuggled across the border from Mexico. As the War on Drugs
intensified, the smuggling of Colombia Gold, Panama Red and Acapulco Gold marijuana
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
XVIt

Introduction
into the USA decreased dramatically. Growing these varieties was not successful as
the pure sativa varieties did not perform well in the North American climate and it wasn’t
until the introduction of indica plants from the Hindu Kush regions of Afghanistan and
Pakistan that breeders could hybridize the sativas and produce sturdy, shorter plants
that were suitable for the North American outdoor growing climate. By breeding pure
indica with pure sativa plants U.S. growers were able to reduce the flowering time and
produce new hybrid varieties of cannabis strains that are still available today.
Indicas or indica-dominant strains are the indoor marijuana grower’s first choice.
They produce shorter, stockier plants that mature in less time than sativa varieties
and produce heavier yields. Indicas are tough plants that can withstand temperature
fluctuations and are very forgiving to the novice grower. Indicas can be grown hydroponically but are also suitable for indoor organic compost grows. However, they prefer
a good-size pot to allow their roots to spread out and they should not be overwatered.
It is easy to mistake yellowing of the leaves with a nutrient deficiency when in actual
fact the roots are drowning in drenched compost. It is advisable to always allow the
pot to dry out between watering. Common indica strains for recreational or medicinal
use include Kush varieties and Northern Lights. When I grew commercially we favored
Northern Lights, which is a pure indica variety that was bred in Holland and is possibly
one of the most famous cannabis strains of all time, alongside sativa types such as
Haze. This pure indica is ideal for indoor growing; it develops into a hardy, short,
stocky plant and it returns heavy yields. After flowering starts Northern Lights plants
are mature in around 6 to 8 weeks and once dried and cured it has a very euphoric
high. Rather than wait until the plant had completely matured and finished we would
harvest when only around 50% of the pistils had turned brown; this seemed to in¬
crease the ratio of THC to CBD and made it a more uplifting smoke. C. indica is the
undisputed heavyweight champion of the cannabis world both in terms of yield and
potency, so I hope you enjoy this edition of Cannabis Indica: The Essential Guide to

the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2 as much as I did. There are some ex¬
cellent strains featured throughout the book and they truly represent some of the best
genetics that the Cannabis indica plant currently has to offer the grower.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2

WtyiiSir
* . ' **^4;

S3gL|

1^ |jj^ - “w
•*> w fj. " *.: ■, g %+■ **?, inuf

1 fel
* #5- 1

|

S'^‘f

^k|||' 1HS -q •'t
BB8^& -£? ■■■ -^5B
^^sagg^ggfcQ: '
* jkS

Afghan Mountain Black
I’m both chonically lazy and vaguely asthmatic, so there are not many things that could
get me halfway up an Afghani mountain. This strain, however, might just be one of
them. Russian breeders Gibridov.net are the best authority I know on landrace strains
from all over the world, and this landrace Afghani is one of a number of strains that
they’ve bred from landrace seeds in their facility, high up in the mountains of Russia!
As a landrace strain this is always going to be less stable and give more expres¬
sions than your average grow-lab created seeds. However, Afghan Mountain Black
is well worth the extra effort it takes to grow, as this really is a phenomenal plant.
Small and bushy, but with great branching and internodal spacing, this looks exactly
as in indica should look - and it behaves like it too. These plants enjoy cold weather
and can withstand harsh changes in temperature before they feel any effects. They
will also be fantastic to make hash from, so make sure you get at least a little!
The high from Afghan Mountain Black, whether smoking the nugs or the fantastic, high-grade has you can make, is absolutely asGibridov.Net, Russia,

tounding; a pure landrace indica smoke that will put

Pure Indica

you out of commission for hours unless you’re a hard-

Genetics: Landrace

core toker. This strain is a real treat, and definitely one

Black Mountain Afghani

to look for!

Potency: THC 14%
gibridov.net

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
2

s.mv':

, * Ax'5-

4-^-m

■

Auto Stoned
^^jga^ssgifcaaaai%»^!g5te@s^»^g^asjs«i^^sB&ageEB^aasssBi^aQSBa»!e«^^

In the lead of the auto-flowering game in Spain is Autofem Seeds, who offer a great
variety of strains, all with ruderalis in their family tree, making them auto-flowering.
The auto-flowering market has experienced a huge surge in the last few years, as
these strains are easier to grow, more accessible and as genetically diverse as their
harder-to-grow counterparts. Autofem, though, have stayed at the forefront of the
breeding pack by bringing more interesting genetics and more stable strains into their
repertoire and generally being awesome dudes. Their Auto Stoned strain is a blend
of Rosetta Stone and Kush genetics, with the requisite dose of Lowryder from the
Joint Doctor to bring the auto-flowering traits in. As anyone familiar with Rosetta
Stone, originally from the Brothers Grimm, will know, that strain was celebrated for its
high resin production and fast flowering time - two traits that have been well preserved
in this Auto Stoned offspring.
If ease of growing is what you’re looking for, they don’t come much easier than
this. As an auto-flowering strain, this plant doesn’t need
Autofem Seeds, Spain

to be subjected to a change of light schedule to flip from

Indica-Dominant

the vegetative to the flowering stages; she simply makes

Genetics: Lowryder x

the switch when she knows she’s ready. She’s also a

(Rosetta Stone x Kush)

very unfussy plant, growing in soil, hydro and outdoor

autofem.com

grows as happily as can be. To get the optimum results
from Auto Stoned, the breeders recommend using a hy¬

droponic set up or 12 liters of soil indoors, with 600 watts of light on a cycle of 20
hours on / 4 hours off. Outdoors, you’ll be best growing in the south of Europe, and
in this region the plants should be finished around May 15th. The rest of Europe will
get to enjoy the harvest around the beginning of June. Indoors, the harvest should
be around 60 or 65 days from seed, which is a time frame that can allow you 5 to 6
harvests per year - enough to keep anyone knee deep in pot, especially when Auto
Stoned gives a yield of 45 grams per plant indoors or 60 grams per plant outdoors.
When fully finished, cured and dried, Auto Stoned buds are a joy to look at. The
biggest pleasure, however, doesn’t come from looking at them: the pleasure, of course,
is in the smoke. The fruity buds give way to a hashy-tasting smoke that’s quite thick
and sits nicely in the lungs. The stone, though, is what you are looking for: a nicely
balanced head and body high with a slight tendency towards the stone. Your brain will
be dancing around nicely inside your head even though your body doesn’t want to go
anywhere, so sit down and enjoy the feel of the couch for a good few hours!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
4

• <•

Berreck
America’s M.G.M. Genetics is a passionate medical cooperative that has a magical
ability to form fantastic strains as if from nowhere. Of course, they all come from their
great breeding stock, which in the case of Berreck is Bubble Berry and Train Wreck.
Though the resulting strain sounds like a high class butler in a British period drama,
its far from posh. In fact, its a rockstar of a plant with great looks and a propensity
for fun that’s just outside the law!
Due to the heavy sativa presence in this indica-dominant strain, Berreck can take
up to 70 days to be fully mature. However, like the gigs of your favorite rock star,
Berreck is worth the wait. The plants stay quite short at about 3 feet, but they are also
heavy yielders. It will need nutrients in the middle of flowering and will need to be
trimmed from the bottom too!
Imagine if you left a fire going near a bowl of overripe fruit in your penthouse hotel
suite while you played a gig, then came back to find that your weed had soaked up
■—

all that smell; that’s exactly what Berreck tastes like. The

M.G.M. Genetics, USA

sweet, woody smell quickly gives way to a fast and racy

Indica-Dominant

head high that’s got enough body stone in it to slow you

Genetics: Bubble Berry x

down and set you grinning and feeling great for the rest

Train Wreck

of the week.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
6

' rl ifJWi

Black Karma Kush
■ -.WMaiBMMMMMMMMMMaiaMMMaMMIMMBaBaWMWBMMMMBai——I—mmm——^__

___

Karmaceuticals is one of my absolute favorite dispensaries in the U.S. Their ded¬
ication to treating patients with both respect and humility gives me renewed faith
in the medical marijuana movement every time I hear about them, and the strains
that they produce are nothing short of fantastic for those same patients. They’re
also fun people! This Black Karma Kush was introduced back in 2010, and is a
blend of their own Purple Kush and a Karma Diesel plant, which immediately puts
it up there on my list of Awesome Strains That Have
Diesel In Their Lineage!
This is a strain that is happiest growing indoors, and
enjoys both hydro and aeroponic set ups. It is a great
choice for anyone looking to try a ScrOG grow, as well
as those with little space to grow in. With a maximum
height of 5 feet and a maximum flowering time of 50
days, this isn’t a strain that takes up much in the way
Karmaceuticals, LLC,

of space or time! And, as you can see from the picture,

USA

Black Karma Kush buds looks like creatures from an¬

Indica-Dominant

other planet! Between their awesome coloration, their

Genetics: Purple Kush x

growing structure and the foxtailing that they exhibit, I

Karma Diesel

almost want to grow out a whole bunch of Black Karma

Potency: THC 20.65%

Kush plants just so I can take glamour shots of them

facebook.com/

all and hang them up in giant frames around my house

Karmaceuticals

- although that might be a little bit weird. No, I’ll just
have to content myself with having a sneaky peek at

those gorgeous buds before smoking them up - although this is a treat in itself! An¬
other treat is the amount of bud you’ll have after harvest is over, as each plant av¬
erages around 110 grams. That’s more than enough reason to invest in some Black
Karma Kush!
Karmaceuticals’ patients have nicknamed this strain Skittles as it really does taste
like the rainbow - and it looks like Skittles too! The very fruity, very sweet taste of this
strain makes you feel like a kid all over again, and so does the relaxing, giggly, eu¬
phoric high that makes its way into your body and settles in for a good long while. It’s
not hard to see why Black Karma Kush is so popular in Denver, as it’s a fun strain to
grow and an even funner one to smoke, with almost no paranoia and a high that
makes you giggle like a teenager on the laughing gas!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
8

Blue Angel
No, it’s not the name of Beyonce and Jay-Z’s baby, although to be honest Blue Angel
would be a slightly less stupid name than the one they gave the poor kid. No, Blue
Angel is the name of an even bigger future superstar; a pure indica strain from Amer¬
ica’s SoHum Seeds. It does, however, share some characteristics with Baby-Z (or is
that Beyoncbaby?): not only is it beautiful to look at but its parents are also hella fa¬
mous! This strain is a cross between a plant that comprised G-13 FI and Hash Plant
FI genetics, and a Blueberry from the infamous DJ
Short. The process of bringing together these three hard
hitters took three years, during which all the plants were
grown and bred together outside, making this an even
more special plant than anyone could imagine.
With an average height of 5 to 6 feet when grown out¬
doors, this plant is relatively short and can be kept even
more so by applying one of a few techniques, such as
SoHum Seeds, USA

Low Stress Training and shortening the vegetative cycle

Pure Indica

if you’re growing indoors. Outdoors it can be fantastic in

Genetics: (G-13 FI x

a backyard grow or even a greenhouse set up. The

Hash Plant FI) x

plants grow quickly but with a strong structure and good

Blueberry

internodal spacing which allows for lots of bud sites

Potency: THC 18%

when it enters the flowering stage. You might not need

facebook.com/

to stake your outdoor Blue Angel plants, but if in doubt,

SoHumSeeds

stake them early on as it will be easier than trying to

sohumseeds.com

stake them when they’re already tall and flowering. It’s
worth taking good care of these beautiful plants, as each

one can yield up to 900 grams of premium pot when grown outdoors. Indoor growers
can expect a similar amount per square yard of grow room. Towards the end of the
flowering stage the plants’ purple hairs will turn browny, and the nugs will be covered
in resin; perfect for making hash!
The smoke of Blue Angel is very subtle, but it isn’t for beginner tokers; the creative
head high and intoxicating effects are best suited to regular smokers or those who
are toking for medicinal benefits. This strain is suitable for those seeking relief from
chronic pain, nausea, insomnia and loss of appetite along with a whole other list of
ailments. A fantastic strain for medicinal and recreational users alike, and one that’s
as fun to grow as it is to smoke!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
10

Blue Dot
The USA’s Green Haven Genetics have got a great little strain here, and one that de¬
serves to make even more of an impact on the U.S. cannabis community as time
goes on and more people experience Blue Dot. It’s an unknown cross, possibly with
some Big Bud and Northern Lights genetics in there, but regardless of its family history
it’s a strain worth seeking out.
Back in 2000 when it was released, Blue Dot became a firm favorite at dispen¬
saries in Oakland, where the patients loved its medicinal effects. Growers will also
love it for its very short stature, good internodal spacing, and its incredibly short flow¬
ering time. Blue Dot can be fully ready for the chop in just 6 short weeks, which is
great if you’re as impatient as me (which I imagine most of you are when it comes to
good bud). The best thing about growing this strain is the thick, dense buds that make
up your large final harvest - although the high is pretty damn good too!
You II notice a ChemDawg-like flavor in this smoke, but with generous overtones of
w^mGrapefruit and a slight hint of citrus. This complexity also
Green Haven Genetics,

comes through in the smoke, which gives a little head

USA

buzz and a huge body stone. This is a fantastic medicinal

Indica-Dominant

strain for those dealing with pain or insomnia - and it

Genetics: Unknown,

tastes great too! Now that’s the kind of medicine we like.

possibly Big Bud x
Northern Lights
Potency: THC 18%
greenhavengenetics.com

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
12

Blue Magoo
In case you didn’t grow up in the US, or have never heard of him, let me tell you a
little bit about Mr. Magoo. He’s a short, fairly round sort of a man, who doesn’t look
like anything special but has an amazing ability to come out on top, despite what hap¬
pens to him. The same could be said of Dynasty Seeds’ strain Blue Magoo, expect
that this strain is much more attractive than its cartoon character counterpart!
This strain is the offspring of a Blueberry by DJ Short and a William’s Wonder F2
plant. Like Mr. Magoo, Blue Magoo is small and squat with quite a bit of weight hang¬
ing on its bones. It has a tight bud structure and is pretty greasy, as I’ve always imag¬
ined Mr. Magoo to be too. Unlike the character, this strain is best grown in organic
soil and fed organic nutrients, and will need to be staked towards the end of its life to
help hold up its fantastically heavy buds!
Blue Magoo is one of those strains that can be great for a million different things,
as it adapts to your mood. However, I think the real Mr. Magoo should have smoked
some of this plant to help him chill out, as the lavender
Dynasty Seeds, USA

and berry-flavored smoke of Blue Magoo gives way to a

Indica-Dominant

relaxing, narcotic stone that would be great for anyone

Genetics: Blueberry x

suffering from stress or anxiety - and he certainly was a

MLB (AKA William’s

bit of a worrier!

Wonder F2)

dynastyseeds.com

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
14

Bubba Kush
■■■MBMMUMMMHBnRMMMHHBBMMMMBHHHNnNMMMBHHMMMKMHMSMNHMMHHHMMi

I’ve said it before and I’ll say it again; if you don’t know who Green House Seed Com¬
pany are, then I don’t know where you’ve been for the last 10 years. I can only assume
that either a very extensive coma / a trip to outer space has meant that you haven’t
been keeping abreast of movements in the cannabis breeding world - and if that’s the
case, then you’ve got some big shocks coming your way (Google “autoflowering” and
hold on to your hat). Suffice it to say that Green House are the Snoop Dogg of the
breeding game, except taller and with more celebrity friends. They’re also pretty damn
good at making strains that become famous in their own right, and Bubba Kush is one
of these. Of course, in North America these days, any strain with Kush heritage is going
to be popular, but by using original Kush and the tasty-as-hell strain Bubble Gum Green
House have made sure that this strain will be favorite amongst smokers who love with
a sickly sweet smoke and a stone that puts them completely out of commission!
As a Kush-derived plant, this strain won’t too take too long to flower or get too tall,
although it does exhibit a little more sativa influence than
Green House Seed Co.,

some other Kush strains. This means that it can reach 3

Holland

or 4 feet in your grow room, and that it will be fully fin¬

Indica-Dominant

ished in 9 weeks instead of 8. The extra wait is well worth

Genetics: Bubble Gum x

it though; finished Bubba Kush nugs are not only juicy

Kush

and sweet, but they look like they’ve been dipped in frost¬

Potency: THC 18.17%

ing thanks to all the crystally trichomes! If you like your

greenhouseseeds.nl

grow room to look like it’s been subject to a very unlikely
snowstorm in the last few weeks of flowering, this might

the strain for you. Bubba Kush plants grow very quickly and before you know it, they’ll
be starting school and asking to borrow your car, so be sure to keep an eye on them,
especially for signs of mold!
The best way I can describe the onset of a Bubba Kush high is like this: you know
when you’re somewhere warm, and you decide to cool off my going swimming? You
dive into a swimming pool, swim around at the bottom for a little while then come up
face first into the warm summer air? Bubba Kush hits you just like that warm air does;
it spreads over your face first, then makes it way down your neck and soon it’s taken
over your whole body, leaving you feel cosy and warm right from the top of your head
to the tips of your toes. This wrapped-up-in-a-comforter feeling lasts for hours and
hours, meaning that your Bubba Kush stash will go a long way, and also that feel like
you’re being hugged all evening long.

Cannabis Indies The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
16

Canna Sutra
No, its not a well-thumbed book of sexual positions that you can just about wrench
your couchlocked body into when you’ve gone over the top with the Herijuana but are
still feeling a little horny - it’s a wicked indica strain from Canna Sutra that will, how¬
ever, put you into the aforementioned frisky state, so make you don’t smoke it with
your smelly buddy Dan unless you find Dan particularly appealing.
As a blend of a Reclining Buddha mother (which actually sounds quite sexy itself —
or have I been watching that weird porn again?) and a
Sensi Star father, Canna Sutra is the flagship strain of
Holland’s Delta-9 Labs, and for good reason too. It per¬
forms better indoors than out, is a big feeder but is sen¬
sitive to overwatering, so don’t go over the top. This plant
finishes in 10 weeks and loves being supercropped!
Canna Sutra is known to elevate your mood, and
maybe something else too; if you find yourself “pitching
Delta 9 Labs, Holland

a tent” don’t worry, just make sure you’ve got someone

Indica-Dominant

there whose company you enjoy - or you might end up

Genetics: Reclining

enjoying your own company, more than usual if you get

Buddha x Sensi Star

what I’m saying!

| Potency: THC 20%
delta9labs.com

V ■ •

f

-

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
18

Caramelice
There are many smokers and growers in Europe and beyond who will tell you that
Positronics are there favorite seed company. I am, by nature, indecisive and afraid of
commitment, so it would be difficult for me to make such a strong claim, but even I
would say that they’re definitely in my top five. Consistently bringing out strains that
make even the most hardcore cynics sit back and take notice, they’re nothing if not
exciting. Their Caramelice

-ain was created by breeding a Hektol plant together with
a Redskunk, and, as they themselves say, it is truly a
Skunk plant for the 21st century.
This is a hugely vigorous plant right from the get go,
with the seedlings shooting up as if the light was a piece
of cake and they were a chunky kid. Keep your lights
low to minimize the potential stretch, otherwise you’ll
wake up one day and your week-old seedling will be
roughly the size of Kobe Bryant. Your Caramelice plants

Positronics Seeds,

will have good internodal spacing and will grow small,

Spain

jagged, light green leaves rather than the fat, deep

Indica-Dominant

green indica leaves you might be waiting for. The stems

Genetics: Hektol x

will also stay quite thin, meaning that staking or some

Redskunk

other form of support will definitely be necessary before

Potency: THC 16%

the flowering period. The breeders also suggest con¬

positronicseeds.com

stant, heavy ventilation to keep humidity levels moder¬
ate, which is a must for Skunk varieties. This ventilation

will also help you out a whole bunch when flowering time rolls around and your grow
room starts to stink more than a dirty diaper that’s been rolled in bear poo and stuffed
inside a durian fruit. You should also work to maintain good pH levels and flush with
molasses during the last two weeks of flowering; something that experienced growers
will have better success with than newbie growers. Caramelice will be finishing in 60
days, and will yield 400 grams per square meter of grow space indoors or the same
amount per plant outdoors.
Hints of citrus fruit will be noticeable along with the usual Skunk smell, but it’s when
you smoke these buds up that the real treat comes in. This fairly balanced high, that’s
also as smooth as the day is long, will calm the body and get rid of stress as well as
increasing your appetite and giving you some nice psychoactive tendencies, making
it especially great for a daytime toke!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
20

Cherry Cheese x G-13
Canada’s Ganja Creator Genetics is a small and relatively new seed company in the
Great White North. Though they’re young they’re definitely not lacking in ambition,
with their own YouTube channel and an ever-growing catalog of fantastic plants. This
blend of the famous Cherry Cheese and most talked about marijuana strain in the
world, G-13, shows that these guys have enough talent to go far and enough good
genetics to get them there!
Cherry Cheese counts Skunk #1 among its parent strains, so be ready for this strain
to have a good amount of stink later in the flowering stage. It’s a quick grower and has
a fantastically high yield, and the good news is that the buds seem to stay fresh forever,
so no matter how much or little you smoke, your buds will always taste great.
Cherry Cheese x G-13 gives a high that’s heady as well as fluffy in the body, giving
you sleepy eyes but keeping your mind bright and awake at the same time. If you can
handle a heavy body then this can be a great daytime smoke, but my personal choice
is to enjoy this strain when I’m just chillin’ at home watch¬
Ganja Creator Genetics,
Canada

ing reruns of the X-Files, as it gets me just high enough
to get paranoid about it all being true facts and just

Indica-Dominant

distracted enough by

Genetics: Skunk #1 x

Gillian Anderson to

G-13

not worry about it.

Potency: THC 17%
ganjacreator.com

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
22

Cherry Hemmingway
Any organic grower who’s serious about providing top quality, natural marijuana to
themselves or their medical patients already knows about the Rev. As Skunk Maga¬
zine’s True Living Organics writer, he’s the go-to guy for organic weed cultivators who
want great advice and beautiful strains. His Kingdom Organic Seeds company pro¬
duces many organically-grown strains like this one, Cherry Hemmingway, which is a
blend of Hawaiian Cherry Bomb, Rez Dog’s Firecracker and Bhutan Heirloom genet¬
ics. Sounds delicious, no?
This strain is a true hybrid with only a 60% indica influence, so expect it to grow
taller than pure indica plants both inside and out. While it can be kept to 3 or 4 feet
indoors, outside it explode with 10 feet of growth! Because of this, it is suitable for
ScrOG growing as well as natural organic grows, though the latter will bring out the
best in this plant. Cherry Hemmy, as its affectionately known, takes 70 days to finish
after forced flowering and will yield up to 60 grams per gallon of soil mix used.
The Rev warns us that this strain is crazy potent, so
Kingdom Organic Seeds

newbie tokers should proceed with caution. At higher

by The Rev, USA

doses this strain can induce anxiety, so keep it mellow

Indica-Dominant

and let your brain basically go numb while your body fol-

Genetics: Hawaiian

lows suit. You’ll enjoy it, I promise.

Cherry Bomb/Rez Dog’s
Firecracker x Bhutan
Heirloom
Potency: THC 19-22%
facebook.com/KingdomOrganicSeeds
facebook.com/
TrueLivingOrganics

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
24

~

k

%

h!if

Chronic
Ah, Chronic; the strain whose name got hijacked and used indiscriminately by stoners
for oh so long. A quick Urban Dictionary search for Chronic will tell you that it’s a name
for weed with no seeds and just one stem, a name for weed better than White Widow,
or a name for weed laced with cocaine. None of them are quite right; it’s a three-way
Northern Lights, Skunk and AK-47 cross from Serious Seeds that took the marijuana
world by storm when it appeared, apparently overnight, on US streets in the mid 90s.
Since the breeders improved this strain in 2000, the medium sized plant has be¬
come a real firecracker in the grow room. It only grows to a medium height, but is
one of the larger yielding strains, giving up to 600 grams per square meter of grow
space both indoors and out. The large central cola will form then surround itself with
side branches, making your Chronic crop look absolutely phenomenal. Indoor grow¬
ers can harvest after 8 or 9 weeks, while outdoor growers should be ready at the
end of October, or the start of November at a push.

PHOTOS BY GBI

I don’t have to tell you how amazing a smoke Chronic
Serious Seeds, Holland

is; anything that gets that famous that quickly is bound

Indica-Dominant

to be totally out of this world. I will tell you, though, that

Genetics: Northern Lights

the balanced high is worth cutting through the bullshit

x (Skunk x Northern

for - so go find some real Chronic!

Cannabis Sndica The Essentia! Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
26

Colorado Kool-Aid
It’s hard to know whether the name of this strain is a reference to its delicious straw¬
berry flavor, or to the fact that anyone who smokes a bowl of Colorado Kool-Aid be¬
comes wholeheartedly devoted to it. I can only assume that the breeders over at Green
Life Medical Center have a sense of humor, meaning that it’s probably both. It’s easy
to believe that this strain, which comprises Big Skunk Hawaiian, Black Tie and Great
White Shark, could command as much devotion as the People’s Temple, though, as
not only is the taste fantastic, but the stone is a total body rocker that paints you on to
the couch and watches while you dry.
Colorado Kool-Aid plants will only grow to 3 or 4 feet tall, and really enjoy both ScrOG
and organic soil grows. It can be grown indoors or out, but the breeders say that this
strain absolutely adores natural sunlight. You should water your plants very well, and
after harvest, leave the buds to dry in darkness to preserve their vivid pink colorings.
Those lucky smokers in Colorado just love the creeping body stone that this strain

PHOTOS BY S.C.

brings, as well as huge dose of uncontrollable giggles
Green Life Medical

that accompany the relaxing feeling. Just remember that

Center, USA

if you tell people you “smoked the Kool-Aid” they might

Indica-Dominant

look and feel more than a little worried - and under¬

Genetics: (Big Skunk

standably so!

Hawaiian x Black Tie) x
Great White Shark
Potency: THC 23%
greenlifemed.com

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
28

Cripit
Stoney Girl Gardens, based in the US, are a fantastic collective of breeders and care¬
givers working to the highest standard possible. Their strains are beyond all others in
terms of potency and medical worth, and they have a legion of followers because of this.
Cripit, otherwise known as Crippled Pit, was first created in 2008 from a Pit Bull plant
and a Cripple Rhino plant, and surprised the breeders by tasting just like Chocolate Thai!
This strain can be grown anywhere, but it grows to 6 feet so be aware of this when
choosing your Cripit grow space. Having said this, this is a particularly good strain for
beginner growers. Even a small exposure of colder temperatures will turn her deep
purple, giving the buds enormous bag appeal! Finishing in only 45 days and giving a
yield of around 200 grams, this is a fast one and great if you don’t want to wait around
for your meds. Keep the temperature in your grow room around 72 degrees Fahren¬
heit for best results!
Dedicate a long curing time to Cripit, as you don’t want to miss out on the equisite
—

flavors of chocolate and sweet candy that will please

Stoney Girl Gardens,

your taste buds! The high is a very cheerful and “up”

USA

one, but also one that gives strong pain relief and help

Indica-Dominant

with nausea and insomnia. Stoney Girl Gardens have

Genetics: Pit Bull x

done it again!

Cripple Rhino
Potency: THC 32%
gro4me.com
stoneygirlgardens.com

Cannabis Sndica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
30

My.r

Delirium
If you ever had any doubt that World of Seeds are serious potheads, then look no
further than the name of this strain. You know that feeling; your head goes all hazy,
you can’t seem to concentrate on anything in the room, your body feels all tingly and
your mind feels nothing short of euphoric even though it’s running all over the place
not sure what’s real and what’s not. It’s called delirium, and it’s what you get when
you’re absolutely high as hell. World of Seeds have been there just as often as we
have, and they love it so much that they’ve even named a strain after it. This cross
between a Mazar-I-Shariff and a Black Domina/Jack Herer plant will most certainly
get you into that much-beloved state, and all with a fantastic taste to boot.
The breeders consider this to be one of their best polyhybrids and they spent
years developing the strain before they felt comfortable releasing it to the public.
Generations of backcrossing have resulted in a very stable strain that expresses
insanely uniform crops - in fact, your grow room will look so much like you’ve bred
an army of perfect little plant brothers and sisters that
World of Seeds, Spain

even this might make you feel delirious. The well-

Indica-Dominant

known vigor of hybrid plants is well preserved in this

Genetics: Mazar-i-Sharif x

plant, and you’ll notice your babies growing day by day.

Black Domina/Jack Herer

Delirium crops are highly resistant to most pests and

Potency: THC 15-20%

diseases, although standing water should never be

worldofseeds.eu

kept in your grow room and you should watch out for
signs of white flies all the time. This strain grows par¬

ticularly well in a greenhouse grow op, as this will satiate its desire to grow outdoors
without allowing it to go back to its landrace roots and grow completely wild! If you
do choose to grow outdoors, be sure to keep an eye on your plants and keep them
from growing too crazy, and be aware that Delirium enjoys milder climates best. In¬
door growers can expect a yield of around 500 grams, while outdoors, this grows to
600 grams after 9 weeks of flowering.
The stinky buds of this plant are potent enough to almost have you feeling high
before you’ve even sparked up a J, but don’t be fooled; this is just the start of it!
With the heavy, enveloping indica stone that we all know and love, you’ll find that
your head goes all hazy, you can’t seem to concentrate on anything in the room,
your body feels all tingly and your mind feels nothing short of euphoric even thought
it’s running all over the place not sure what’s real and what’s not. Coincidence? I
think not!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
32

a ijy <r 1

ml
’

C? ■:

RQSKk i

mAj

■:

Dready Auto Jack
WSi HNNIMNMMMHMttMMMMNMNMNMBiNMi

I know that the UK’s Dready Seeds just like to name all of their strains with the
“dready” company title, but I can’t help but thinking of a heavily dreadlocked redhaired Canadian named Jack who likes drinking Pabst Blue Ribbon when I think of
this strain. Strangely, that’s not actually far from what the finished plant looks like,
as its foxtailing buds join up to make dreadlock-like plaits that are covered in little
orange hairs. I’m not sure if it likes drinking PBR, though, and I’m not sure I want to
test that out.
As a blend of Ruderalis and Jack Herer genetics, Dready Auto Jack is an auto¬
flowering strain that is particularly easy to grow. As well as not needing any change
in light cycle, this strain can adapt very well to almost any type of grow op and fairs
especially well in hydro systems. It also grows taller than many other ruderalis-influenced indica strains and can reach up to 4 feet in a hydro set up. The buds will be
almost literally dripping with crystals by the end of the 60 days, and each plant will
give between 30 and 50 grams of awesome bud.
Dready Seeds, UK.

Much like a drunken Canadian, Dready Auto Jack is

Indica-Dominant

hella fun; relaxing and energizing all the at same time,

Genetics: Ruderalis x

pretty chill to hang with all day, and will leave you dazed

Jack Herer

and confused by the end of the session!

Potency: THC 6-12%
dreadyseeds.com

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
34

Dutch Delight
Holland’s Flying Dutchmen are the breeders that all breeders respect; they’ve been
working in the field for over fifteen years and can always be relied upon to release
a strain that makes you get that tingly excited feeling in the pit of your stomach, the
one that kids get when they go to bed on Christmas Eve. It’s unlikely that I’ll ever
go to bed one night and wake up to find that some sort of cannabis Santa has filled
my worn-through old socks with a few kilos of Dutch Delight, but the thought still
gives me the tummy wiggles. This blend of Big Bud, Skunk and Afghani genetics is
enough to make any serious toker feel like it’s Christmas day, although I spend most
of my Christmases feeling gassy and watching old British comedies on the TV rather
than getting baked as a ham and looking at my own palms for hours on end. I know
which one I’d rather do!
This strain is so indica-dominant that you’ll have trouble convincing anyone who
sees it growing that it isn’t a pure indica. It’s a very compact, very bushy little plant
——

-pi that’s perfect for bedrooms, attics, dorm rooms and

Flying Dutchmen,

even those stealth grow boxes that are all the rage

Holland

right now. The breeders bred this plant exactly with

Indica-Dominant

these type of grow spaces in mind, as they share my

Genetics: Big Bud x

opinion that growing great cannabis should not be re¬

Skunk x Afghani

stricted to those with a whole spare room to cultivate

Potency: THC 17%

in! However, the yield and potency of this strain were

flyingdutchmen.com

also key goals for the breeders, and they certainly
haven’t missed the mark there. After a flowering time

that averages 60 days, a 5-foot plant can yield up to 140 grams. That’s a huge har¬
vest for indoor plants and can keep the hobby smoker in enough weed to keep him
high until New Year’s Eve! Dutch Delight plants grown outside can be even heavier
yielders, although you should be sure not to expose this strain to too much variable
weather as disease can take hold.
The smell of Dutch Delight buds will remind you of the best Skunk you’ve ever
had, with that peppery feeling lingering in your nose even while the smoke settles in
your lungs. The stone hits much the same as an over friendly and massive English
Sheepdog once hit my dad: it will sit on your lap, pin you to the chair and refuse to
get off for a good couple of hours. Don’t be afraid to just give in and enjoy it, as not
even a bowl of the world’s best kibble resting on top of Lassie’s belly could coax that
hound of a stone away from you.

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
36

Fayaka
If you ever find yourself hanging around on the streets of Salvador on the north coast
of Brazil, you might just be lucky enough to hear a group of people yelling the name
of this strain again and again, before launching into some amazing music. Don’t worry;
this isn’t the sign of a marijuana-based uprising in which all gringos will get thrown
out of the country so that Brazilians can keep all their amazing pot to themselves. No,
this just means that you’ve come across Public MiniStereo SoundSystem, a dancehall
group so popular that Spain’s Vulkania Seeds have named this fantastic strain after
their well-known war cry. To create this strain, the breeders crossed an ‘06 cut of New
York City Diesel with Nepal Joy, which they believe no longer exists outside of their
grow labs. Pretty special, no?
As the landrace indica influence in this plant is so strong, it will stay very small
in your grow room. Fayaka plants are like little land mines; hard to spot, but explo¬
sive in their results! The plants will be incredibly dense and will pay tribute to their
native Nepal by growing incredibly tight little colas that
Vulkania Seeds, Spain

look like small versions of Mount Everest. In fact, if

Indica-Dominant

your grow room floor was covered in a thick smog and

Genetics: Nepal Joy x

all you could see was the top of these little mountains,

New York City Diesel ‘06

you’d be forgiven for thinking you were tripping into the

Potency: THC 18%

Studio Ghibli world! Not only are these plants incredi¬

vulkaniaseeds.com

bly compact and fantastic in their yield, they also give
flowers that are absolutely loaded with trichomes -

again, looking as snowy as the top of that most famous of mountains. If you’re des¬
perate for a trip to Nepal but can’t afford it, invest your money in some Fayaka
seeds, a macro lens and a dry ice machine. Before long you’ll be posting photos
of your grow room on Facebook and nobody will know the difference. To achieve
the right effect, keep your plants in the vegetative stage for just 16 days, and allow
them between 50 and 60 days of flowering. This will give you a yield of up to 550
grams per square yard of grow room AND an album full of pictures to fool even the
most experienced traveler!
Just to complete the whole experience, the effects of Fayaka are much like the ef¬
fects you would get climbing Mount Everest: light-headedness, body numbness, con¬
fusion, drowsiness, and finally, when you reach that peak and look out over the whole
gorgeous country, euphoria and a feeling that all is quite well with the world. And it’s
cheaper than a flight to Kathmandu!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
38

Forfiter Special
Ultimate Seeds have surpassed themselves with this strain, and you don’t even have
to smoke it to know that it’s true. Just look at its family history; if Forfiter Special was
to have a Christmas party, ChemDawg DD, Blue Moonshine, AK-47 and New York
City Diesel would all be there, surrounded by baby Forfiter Special offspring running
into furniture and eating mince pies until they puked. That’s quite the family gathering,
and one that I, for one, would like to be invited to. With such a background, then, it’s
clear even on paper that Forfiter Special is an intense mix of indica and sativa genet¬
ics, with the indica influence coming out just slightly on top.
The blend of these genetics means that Forfiter Special grows with that wellknown hybrid vigor, bursting right out of its seed shells as if seed shells were going
out of fashion. Due to the almost balanced indica and sativa influence, these plants
will be taller than other indica plants, but not by too much; their size still suits an in¬
door grow room, as well as an outdoor set up or even a greenhouse grow. Their
flowering time is slightly lengthened by the presence of

Ultimate Seeds

sativa genetics, meaning that they won’t be fully fin¬

Indica-Dominant

ished until 9 weeks have gone by. The slightly airier

Genetics: Chemdog DD

buds mean that your plants shouldn’t be attacked by

x Blue Moonshine x AK-47

mold, but it’s important to have sufficient ventilation in

x NYCD

your grow room just in case. Check your plants daily

Potency: THC 19%

for signs of pests or problems, as you definitely don’t

ultimateseeds.com

want to end up losing any of these fantastic buds to
thrips or white flies! The branching on these plants

means that they take especially well to a ScrOG or SOG set up, which will help you
to get the maximum yield from however many plants you can have. Pairing this tech¬
nique with an organic soil grow will ensure that you not only have the biggest harvest
of bud, but that you have the best possible tasting Forfiter Special nugs, too. It will
be worth it; trust me!
Forfiter Special buds are very sweet smelling, and once you blaze up you’ll feel
as if you’re engulfed in thick cotton candy smoke. These buds are very potent, making
them great for medical users, especially ones dealing with more than one condition.
If you’re dealing with body pain and a more psychological problem, this strain might
be great for you. The high is a very balanced one that lingers around for a long, long
time and makes even recreational users feel just lovely inside - this is definitely a
strain that deserves to be called Special.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
40

'

.mm-

Fruit Spirit
'->.?^v'.-.\,.;'V->V>>.V'V

&2>ftfli3!3Mfti5B8ftaift»Kfegftfr^aagfcfta«ge^aa8s«Bgs^^

Royal Queen Seeds are a great company based in Holland, produping seeds that
are nothing less than regal! For this strain, though, I can only assume that they’ve
stopped watching the British royal wedding on repeat and have instead been listening
to Nevermind a lot while embracing a healthier diet; this strain smells like Fruit Spirit,
and that’s because it is! A cross between DJ Short’s most fruity of plants, Blueberry,
and a White Widow plant, Fruit Spirit buds promise to be as tasty as a gobstopper
and as juicy as an especially overripe apple. Could this strain count as one of our
five a day? No? Dammit.
Although this plant has a good dose of sativa genetics, it won’t grow any taller than
6 feet, even outdoors or in a greenhouse grow. Indoors, it can be kept to 4 feet or
smaller, especially with training and techniques such as SOG. If you’re growing in the
UK or France, you may be limited to an indoor grow with this strain; it does not like
the cold one bit, and is much better suited to areas that enjoy a tropical climate and
■■>—■—

heaps of sunlight, such as Italy or Brazil. In any grow set

Royal Queen Seeds,

up, the plant won’t stretch much during flowering and in¬

Holland

stead grows huge main colas that will delight any

Indica-Dominant

grower! Fruit Spirit is very resistant to mold and diseases

Genetics: Blueberry x

in most climates, though wetter countries can lead to

White Widow

mold in the buds in the later stages of flowering, so be

Potency: THC 15-20%

careful to watch for that. The breeders recommend dry¬

royalqueenseeds.com

ing the plants for 7 days before harvest, to best preserve
the taste and aroma. They suggest a dry trim as the best

way to keep your bud tasting amazing. Growers can expect to harvest 40 grams per
plant, which translates to 400 grams per square yard of grow space under a 600-watt
light. Fruit Spirit plants will take 8 weeks to be properly mature, which means outdoor
growers should harvest in early October in the Northern Hemisphere.
Fruit Spirit buds are always going to be as much a treat as a huge ice cream sun¬
dae after a healthy dinner, but if you have dry trimmed your buds and given them a
long curing period then the flavor of this smoke is going to knock your head right off
your shoulders. It’s like a mango and a pineapple just had sex in your mouth, and just
as you’re pondering over how gross that actually is, the nicely balanced head and
body high creeps up and slowly takes you over from the inside out. It feels like you
might never properly be in control of your head or your body ever again. Oh well,
whatever, Nevermind!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
42

Funxta’z Get Rite
wsswaaMsw1

Anyone growing organically in the U.S. these days knows about Don’t Panic Organix
- and if they don’t, then they definitely should. California-based breeder Eddie Funxta
is becoming a celebrity in the organic cannabis world, with legions of followers already
hooked on his fantastic chemical-free strains and growing style. This strain is sure to
inspire even more fans, as it’s a killer cross between The Who Northern Lights and
Eddie’s own Funxta’z Triple Platinum OG. The Who Northern Lights is a rare North
California indica from the hills of Humboldt County that was gifted to Eddie by a fan¬
tastic twenty-five-year veteran grower known only as “S.” This was bred with Eddie’s
favorite Kush to create a stain that would help AIDS and cancer patients needing a
strain that was easy to grow and alleviated their symptoms.
Although this strain is technically still in development, it has been making the rounds
for five years now, and continues to be improved upon by the breeder. It’s happy to be
grown either indoors or outdoors, but should always be grown in an organic soil medium
without any nasty synthetic additives or nutrients. Be very
Don’t Panic Organix,

aware when purchasing your soils and nutrients that la¬

USA

bels can be misleading, so make sure it’s organic! The

Indica-Dominant

growth pattern of Funxta’z Get Rite is very typical of an

Genetics: The Who

indica strain, with the well-known Christmas tree-like

Northern Lights x Funxtaz

shape and size when grown outdoors, though it will grow

Triple Platinum OG

to around 6.5 feet when given enough space. Indoors, the

Potency: THC 18%

shape is slightly different, with a more flattened canopy

dontpanicorganix.com

and a wider breadth. Be aware of the width of these
plants when setting up your grow room, as no one wants

to end up with a crop that they can’t get through! All this strain needs is 8 weeks to be
fully finished, by which time you’ll be so keen to get at the buds that you’ll almost rip
them from the trees. Don’t, though. Always harvest with the proper equipment!
The name of this strain refers to the fact that when you smoke it, it puts you exactly
where you need to be. If you’re sleepy or run down, it will either put you to sleep or
sit you on your ass and make you chill out (forcibly, if necessary) for as long as you
need to. However, if you’re bright eyed and bushy tailed, running around like a puppy
on steroids, then it will lift you up and let you fly even higher, with a clear, excitable
effect and just a little body lethargy. The taste is very diesel-y but with a hint of creamy
sweetness too, like eating an organic ice cream while your partner is filling up the car:
delicious, but with a background smell of fuel.

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
44

G-Bomb
Big Buddha Seeds have long been bringing us the best that the UK cannabis scene
has to offer, and they don’t look like they’re going to let up any time soon. Rather
than just working with the same old strains, though, these guys like to improve on
the strains that have gone before them, and this offering is no different. The fan¬
tastic G-Force, also known just as G, has been kicking around the underground
scene in Britain for a while now and has become a fan favorite thanks to its strength
and wicked high. Not ones to just rest on their laurels though, Big Buddha Seeds
have selected a quality clone of G-Force and have bred it with itself through several
generations, to really bring out everything they loved about the original plant. Nice
work, guys!
Whether you’re as new to growing as a two-minute old child is to breathing, or
whether you could put together an aeroponic system blindfolded and using only
your teeth, you’ll find that G-Force is a fun and easy strain to grow. British breeders
have been playing around with it for years and don’t
Big Buddha Seeds, UK

seem to be getting bored just yet (although those

Pure Indica

British are sticklers for tradition). This is a pure indica,

Genetics: UK G-Force

and as such, will be short, bushy and incredibly easy

Clone Only (selfed)

to handle both indoors and out. Indoors will be the

Potency: THC 15%

prime position for G-Bomb, although this resilient plant

bigbuddhaseeds.com

can take just about anything you care to throw at it except reruns of that terrible Benny Hill show, it’s a

medium feeder that enjoys a soil grow as much as a hydro one, so the decision
about where and how to grow is totally up to you. You will need to have good ven¬
tilation if you grow indoors though, as the nugs on this plant will be so tight and
heavy that they practically invite mold in and help it set up its furniture. Ventilation
will also be helpful in getting rid of the incredibly pungent smell, although you should
be using something like charcoal filters before pushing the Skunk smoke right out
of your grow room. Outdoor growers should be ready to chop at the beginning of
November, whereas indoor growers can harvest anywhere between 8 and 10 weeks
into flowering, depending on how each plant looks.
The intense spicy smell of the G-Bomb buds might remind you of the awesome
curries you had on that drunken night in London, but the flavor is all hash and Skunk.
It’s the high, however, that has all of the UK loving this strain; the almost-narcotic
body stone is very easy to fall in love with, and very easy to fall asleep on, too.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
46

Though the infamous Mr. Nice himself hails from the rolling hills of Wales, the seed
company that bears his name is based in the country of pot, Holland, and most of
their breeding takes place there. Where else could you bring together such classic
strains as the governmental myth-laden plant G-13 and an FI cut of the ever-popular Skunk #1?
With an Afghani ancestry, you would expect this strain not to exhibit much stretch
and to be easily manageable in a small space - and it is. It is happy to be grown in
both organic and hydroponic systems, although if you’re keen to get the best possible
taste, organic might be your preferred way to go. It suits a greenhouse set up per¬
fectly, though you should keep an eye on your plants as they can be susceptible to
mold. The overall yield can be up to 650 grams per square yard of grow room, when
growing in optimum conditions. The flowering time is between 7 and 9 weeks, which
translates to harvesting in September in the Northern Hemisphere or late March in
warn

Mr. Nice Seeds, Holland

the Southern Hemisphere.
The taste of G-13 Skunk smoke is slightly fuel-y and

Indica-Dominant

slightly peppery, although the main attraction isn’t the fla¬

Genetics: G-13 x Skunk

vor, it’s the effects. Be ready for a beautifully balanced

#1 FI

head and body high that leaves no part of you not high!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
48

H.

'-A
%

klK^ V'^Jm

Grape Diesel
Now, I totally agree with Thomas Jefferson on a lot of things, and the fact that all men
are essentially the same is something we can all get along with. However, all Diesel
strains are not created equal, and no bill of rights will make this otherwise. Cali Gold
Genetics’ fabulous Grand Daddy Purple x (Nigerian x Kandahar) hybrid sits high and
above its Diesel brethren, in both nobility and effect; and if you don’t believe me, get
yourself some and try it out!
Expressing two main phenotypes, this strain yields the highest possible amount when
given plenty of grow room and a lot of watering. For many people, growing outdoors will
be the best way to achieve this, but it can also grow well indoors. This strain is flexible
in when it should be harvested, but the breeders recommend somewhere between
weeks 9 and 10 for best results. 50% of the plants will grow delicious-looking purple
bracts, which combine with the deep green leaves to look like a Monet painting on acid.
Grape Diesel will give you a huge yield of the best quality, so don’t be worried
about smoking your stash too quickly. The rock hard,
Cali Gold Genetics, USA

berry-smelling buds will explode into a cloud of grape

Indica-Dominant

smoke, which will cover you from head to toe and make

Genetics: Grand Daddy

you melt right into that couch. Now that, my friends, is

Purple x (Nigerian x

a Diesel strain.

txanaanarj
Potency: THC 16.93%
caligoldgenetics.com

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
50

4

Grape Escape
-----|rr—-.^^.^^^.i-.^^rii-nwrT^-i-Biniiriii-iiiiraiiiiiiiiinriwi-iiiiiiiiiiiiawiiiiiii

—

Grape Escape from Canada’s Humber Valley Seeds is an enigmatic and exciting
strain by a seed company that you’re going to be seeing a lot more of in the future.
The parent strains may be unknown, but this is definitely an indica-dominant strain
with some quality parentage and a whole heap of personality.
As a mainly indica strain you can expect Grape Escape to stay fairly squat and
bushy with just a tiny bit of stretch, which can be kept to a minimum by ensuring that
the lights are never too far away from the tips of the plants. As with any Grape strain,
it can be beneficial to stay with organic soil grows so as not to adulterate the amazing
grape taste with any nasty chemical nutrients; even with a molasses flush, the flavor
seems to suffer a little. The finished Grape Escape buds will be covered in dank trichomes and, if you’re lucky, might have that purple tint that increases the bag appeal
by about 1000%.
Aromas of fruit, mint and even licorice come through in this complex and alluring
smoke that’s best enjoyed from a vaporizer. The subtlety
Humber Valley Seeds,

of the taste isn’t shared by the stone, though, which is

Canada

as inconspicuous as a neon elephant in a grey-squirrels-

Indica-Dominant

only nightclub and hits with about the same weight. A

Potency: THC 19%

devastating smoke, for sure!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
52

Grapefruit Diesel
I’ve said many times that I’m a fan of all things Diesel - apart from Vin Diesel, who is
pretty terrible in all movies except Pitch Black, which was fantastically awesome and this strain just goes to prove even more that Diesel strains really work for me.
I’ve also said that I am a big fan of Canada’s Next Generation Seed Company, who
primarily work with strains from their home country and the Pacific Northwest, repre¬
senting North America in the best way possible! This time, Next Gen have taken a
luscious Grapefruit plant and bred it into Soma’s famous New York City Diesel to cre¬
ate this strain, and in doing so they’ve caught the fabulous vigor of the hybrid as well
as the great taste and killer high of the parent strains, too.
The breeders at Next Generation chose this particular phenotype to stabilize as
it was the fastest-flowering Diesel that they had ever come across, and they wanted
to hang on to this fantastic trait to make this strain even easier to grow. It’s already
far from a chore to deal with, as it’s got a maximum height of 6 feet and can stay as
^——i

small as 2 feet indoors, but the shortened flowering

Next Generation Seed

time puts this strain ahead of many other Diesel plants

Company, Canada

in terms of speed. Grapefruit Diesel branches out very

Indcia-Dominant

well during the vegetative stage, making it a good

Genetics: Grapefruit x

choice for a SOG set up which will help get the maxi¬

NYC Diesel

mum yield. The official flowering period of this strain is

Potency: THC 15-20%

55 days, although some growers prefer to leave it for

greenlifeseeds.com

an additional 10 days to allow the flavor and the aroma
to become even more pronounced. Whenever you de¬

cide to harvest, you’ll get somewhere in the region of 400 grams per square yard of
grow room. The finished buds will be so purple that they almost look black, and will
be so covered in trichomes that it seems as if diamonds have been pressed into
them to “vajazzle” them up! This is a great strain for rookie and intermediate growers
alike, so look out for those seeds!
The main draw of any Grapefruit strain will always be the phenomenal taste and
smell, but this strain has the added benefit of that telltale oil-and-spice combination
of the Diesel family. If you decided to leave your plants for that little bit longer this fan¬
tastic combination of sweets will be that more pronounced, but if you chopped early,
they’ll still be strong enough to render your mouth completely amazed. The high is
pure Diesel: heady, then slightly psychedelic, then relaxing, moving down into the
body and settling with no paranoia in the mind, too.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
54

~^S* '-^*|F|
JfcN', V;
CT1-

.-

1 \km S|*

«& #HS1

oafr*

!¥^u^Jfm 11 *?

W&gjifr - <^pf'

^PS.-dr ..&

,>%#?
. <"c3

gSlO

: ,|W

L-lSl!

# *;

i:

Green Shark
Now, I’ve had my fair share of encounters with sharks before. I’m no marine biologist,
but I did spend a bit of time in Australia and I am a fan of surfing. In fact, one Saturday
at Manly beach I went down to the shore and got knee deep before the big shark
alarm went off and I almost literally pooped my pants and ran back to shore. Despite
the crazy set of about 15 hardcore surfers who didn’t move, everyone else stayed on
shore for 20 minutes while the 3 dusky whalers that were purportedly circling the wa¬
ters got bored and swam away. I didn’t get a good look at them, but I’m pretty sure
they weren’t green; in fact, I’ve never seen a green shark in my life before. Maybe
there’s a different type of shark that swims of the coast of Hero Seeds’ native Spain,
or perhaps they just named this Black Domina x Great White Shark cross that way
because its got a huge bite. Either way, this is a great strain that kicks your ass before
you even know what’s happening!
With a genetic history that includes Super Skunk, Brazilian, Indian, Northern
■■

Lights and Hash Plant, Green Shark comes from a long

Hero Seeds, Spain

line of fantastic hybrids. This plant will grow to a

Indica-Dominant

medium height but can also be kept to a fairly short

Genetics: Black Domina

height indoors with minimal effort. One surprising thing

(Afghan) x Great White

is that this strain doesn’t display as much vigor as you

Shark

would expect, and might even seem to be slow at the

Potency: THC 22-24%

start of the vegetative stage. Don’t worry, though, as

heroseeds.com

these plants are just late bloomers (if you’ll pardon the
pun) and will catch up to the other plants in your grow

room before too long. When you flip them into the flowering stage, they’ll experience
the kind of growth spurt usually felt by teenage boys who find themselves a whole
foot taller than all their friends after one crazy week at the age of 14. They are fairly
well branched plants with a good, strong structure, and given the right amount of
light, can be huge yielders. Outdoor growers should be sure to stake the plants early
on to help them hold their own weight just before harvest. The flowering time of this
strain sits at around 60 days.
Much like the Bullshark and the ever-feared Great White, Green Shark definitely
has a strong bite to it and can make you feel like you’ve just got your legs in a horrific
ocean incident if you go a little overboard (don’t pardon that pun; it’s there on pur¬
pose). This Hero seeds offering is for sure a great medical strain and one that will
leave you reeling and recovering for a while!
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
56

£, -'BR

Hash Plant
Ah, Sensi Seeds. Your strains are like the Louis Vuitton bags of the marijuana-growing
world; everyone wants one. For a long time now, Sensi have been bringing out totally
new strains that blow everyone out of the water, each of which is then taken up by a
whole bunch of other seed companies who either use that strain to create even more
amazing offspring plants, or who create their own version of the new Sensi classic.
Well, they do say that imitation is the sincerest form of flattery!
Sensi created this strain from an original Hash Plant - one of the finest hash-mak¬
ing true Afghani plants brought over from the Hindu Kush - and a Northern Lights
plant, who you might say were always meant to be together. Hash Plant is such a fa¬
vorite at the Sensi breeding facility that you’ll find the genetics in many other strains,
too, but only in this strain is the Hash Plant really allowed to come into its own. The
prevalence of indica genetics in this cross means that Hash Plant is the ultimate strain
for heavy tokers growing indoors; if you want to make your own high-grade hash but
you’ve only got that little space under the stairs to grow
Sensi Seeds, Holland

in, get this strain. It will stay short and squat throughout

Indica-Dominant

its life span, bushing out into a more serious-looking

Genetics: 75% Hash

plant in the flowering stage. Outdoor growers shouldn’t

Plant x 25% Northern

overlook Hash Plant either, though, as it grows particu¬

Lights

larly well outdoor in sunny climates when it can be put

Potency: THC 22%

straight into the soil and allowed to flourish. The flower¬

sensiseeds.com

ing period of this strain is amazingly short, being just 45
days in some environments, meaning that whether

you’re growing indoors or out you won’t find yourself sitting by the plants begging
them to finish; more likely you’ll go out for pizza and return to find an army of them
stood in your kitchen demanding to be harvested - and when that happens, you better
get more pizzas in, as this harvest is going to take a while! In the perfect environment,
Hash Plant can be an absolutely huge yielder, so let’s hope you’ve got a space big
enough to dry all the bud!
As you might have guessed, your finished Hash Plant buds will look so resinous
you’ll think you’ve dropped them in a bucket of oil while you were working on your
truck. I’ve never seen buds quite so greasy in all my life, and even just the finger hash
that you can make after harvest is of the highest quality. That’s not to say that this
strain doesn’t pack a punch in a bong, because it most certainly does, but you’d be a
fool not to make up a iittle stash of bubble hash - just a little one!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
58

rm; p,

vM&mg

Heaven
MBgBaBMgBEagaaaWfflHlBffllBBaggggttBaBBBMBBaBBBMMaBgBBMMSMaMMMaia

Holland’s Rokerij Seeds are almost setting themselves up for a fall with this strain.
Naming anything after the supposed place of eternal awesomeness and hangouts
with the seraphim is setting some pretty high expectations (if you’ll pardon the pun),
though of course this Heaven has the distinct advantage that you don’t actually have
to die to get there. And that’s one serious upside. However, being so ballsy in naming
this strain also means that it actually MUST be that good, and with parentage that in¬
cludes Swiss Sativa, Super Skunk and Northern Lights, I’m very inclined to believe
that this strain really does transport you to places you’ve never been before. Add this
to the fact that I am a lot more likely to get into this Heaven than the one that counts
St. Peter as its bouncer, and you’ve got yourself a real convert!
It turns out Heaven isn’t above the clouds at all; it’s about 5 feet off the ground
and can be kept even lower if it’s indoors, which is going to make a lot of religious
paintings seem very wrong! The nugs of this plant will be nice and tight without
being so dense you think they might be harboring a
Rokerij Seeds, Holland

black hole somewhere inside. Their slightly more loose

Indica-Dominant

structure means that they are a lot less likely to suc¬

Genetics: Swiss Sativa x

cumb to mold, although good ventilation will always be

Super Skunk x Northern

key. Good ventilation will also help your Heaven plants

Lights

be even stronger, and you don’t want them to struggle

Potency: THC 17%

holding their tremendous weight when the end of the

rokerijseeds.com

flowering stage rolls around, if you think this might be
an issue, stake early on to avoid the mess of doing it

later! For a medium-sized plant, the yield is absolutely huge; up to 700 grams per
square yard is an average, and that’s a lot of Heaven to handle! Thankfully the flow¬
ering time sits at around 80 days, so you won’t be waiting around for most of your
life to get to Heaven - unlike most people!
I always imagined that Heaven would be full of Greek yogurt, skate ramps and
attractive naked people, but in fact it’s more of a state of mind; a very warm sort of
cerebral high that starts at the top of your head and slowly melts down to engulf the
rest of your head and finally your body. They were right about one thing though; it
is very long lasting, and you do see some white lights. I’m still waiting on the yogurt
and skate ramps, but I reckon if I smoke the rest of this bag they’ll turn up eventually.
It’s official: Heaven rocks, and you don’t need to wait until you shuffle off this mortal
coil to get there!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
60

Hellriser
No, it’s not named after the weird British horror movie featuring the pale guy with all
that pointy shit in his face - though with a company name like Evil Seeds you’d be for¬
given for making the connection with scary movies. No, Hellriser is an old-school Skunk
phenotype that was selected back in the early 90s and has since been grown and
loved in Evil Seeds’ native Spain, which will delight any lovers of true Skunk strains in
Europe and beyond!
Though this plant is only marginally indica-dominant, it still sits shorter than most Skunk
plants and as such is perfect for indoor growing. It will also go far beyond what many
indoor growers have previously experienced, in terms of quality of the finished product
and the amount of bud it gives. It enjoys a very short flowering time, taking between 50
and 55 days to be fully finished, and best of all, it is a massive yielder. Indoor growers can
expect up to 800 grams of fantastic Hellriser bud per square yard of grow space.
As with all Skunk strains, Hellriser’s high is one that is precariously balanced beMHHMHHHBnMBiHMMH

tween a killer head high and a devastating body stone.

Evil Seeds, Spain

The exact effects of this strain can depend on how you’re

Indica-Dominant

feeling that day, but you can expect an all-round high that

Genetics: Old School

leaves you thinking about it for days afterwards. A great

Skunk

Spanish strain!

Potency: THC 20%
evilseeds.es

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
62

'

Herijuana Jack 33
I think the appeal of this strain can be explained by something that happened to me
not long ago: I was toking along with a friend of mine who smokes a lot of pot but
knows next to nothing about it - you know those people, the ones who don’t know
their Kush from their tush or their Haze from their elbow. Well, I mentioned that I had
some Herijuana Jack 33 in my bag and his eyes lit up: “You’ve got a Herijuana cross?
Jesus man, gimme some of that bud!” In crossing Herijuana with their own Jack 33,
Ch9 have bred a strain to tantalize even the least informed of pot smokers - and to
absolutely delight those in the know!
A fast finisher, this strain will be done in 7-9 weeks, and will give up to 80 grams
per plant indoors when given 35 days of vegetative growth. Outdoor growers can ex¬
pect between 300 and 450 grams, depending on where they’re growing. It’s not about
quantity with this plant though; the high quality, sought-after rock hard buds are solid
gold and should be regarded as such!
With a hashy, chemically flavor, this strain has a very
Ch9 Female Seeds,

distinct smoke that will put you straight on your ass and

Europe

sit on your shoulders to keep you there. You’ll have no

Indica-Dominant

doubt that this is a great indica, though you might not be

Genetics: Motarebel’s

able to talk about it for a while!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
64

gpr
*<31
BSjC‘ J#*wS
4* '
p
&

. -_\'.. «.i|gjfipr

- ..y
vl

Wm^Hc
i
i

1

%3Ht

■

S

* ^MJl. .

4m

wJ$r%*mr^ M
is

Hindu Kush Auto
Lowlife Seeds might sound like the sort of company that can’t be trusted, but in reality,
they’re great guys who just like to give themselves a pretty badass name. I can see
why, though, as they are pretty badass: they’re a UK-based breeder’s collective who
obviously love the most classic and best loved cannabis strains, as they not only
breed with some fantastic breeding stock but their strains, like Hindu Kush Auto, are
new upgrades of proven plants to make them the best they can be. In order to make
this strain autoflowering, Lowlife have bred Lowryder, the father of all autoflowering
strains, with both a Hindu Kush plants and a Master Kush plant, just to bring the every¬
one’s favorite Kush influence right to the front of the mix.
This plant is the ultimate plant for a closet grow or a grow room that’s otherwise
challenged for space, as Hindu Kush Auto plants will only just grow taller than 1 foot
- and not by a lot. These plants won’t branch out much or get too wide, and they don’t
require much root space at all - although you should be sure not to stunt the plant
growth by making the container sizes too small. The

Lowlife Seeds, UK

amount of plants you can get per square meter of grow

Indica-Dominant

room is huge with an Hindu Kush Auto crop, be but sure

Genetics: Hindu Kush x

not to stack them too closely together or you’ll have no

Master Kush x Lowryder

space to get around them and check for things like mold

Potency: THC 17%

in the later stages of flowering. This strain takes 8 weeks

seedsman.com

to be properly finished, and as with any autoflowering
strain, it doesn’t need a change in the light cycle to flip

into the flowering stage; just watch this plant mature in its own time. The finished buds
will be incredibly dense and heavy, just like a good cheesecake, and they’ll be coated
in a thick layer of resin that’s just begging you to make some hash. A whole cheese¬
cake of hash, perhaps?
As you would expect from a plant that’s part indica, part ruderalis, Hindu Kush
Auto gives a deeply indica stone that’s almost narcotic in its scope. This means that
it’s a great strain for medical users with chronic pain, insomnia, loss of appetite or
any problems with joints and muscles. Any non-medical users should be aware that
they will lose all use of their legs and, in cases of extreme dosing, their arms after
smoking this strain - so that salsa class is definitely out, and you might have to check
if Dominoes will deliver to the window right behind the couch, because you probably
won’t make it to the door either. I would be lying if I said that I hadn’t had a pizza
posted through my front door before, slice by slice, after smoking this strain.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
66

sP

Holland’s Hope
To me, the name of this strain evokes a sort of post-apocalyptic stoner society (postapotcalyptic?), in which Europe’s whole marijuana supply has been wiped out in a
weed war that left no stem standing. Thin, worryingly clear-headed stoners scurry
around their pot-barren countries, covered in the kief dust of combat and turning over
every stone to try and find that last elusive piece of bud, or one singular seedling that
survived the battle. Finally, after months of sobriety in which the possibility of finding
something seemed to disappear, a twenty-year-old woman just outside of Amsterdam
spots one fat baby leaf sprouting from what used to be someone’s backyard. The
whole nation bates its breath as their top growers work to get this little indica baby
growing; and grow she does. When she reaches 2 feet in height and begins to flower,
the country rejoices, and a clever journalist christens the plant with a name that en¬
compasses the feeling of the nation: she is Holland’s Hope.
Of course, in reality this pure indica strain was actually brought to Holland in the
early 80s, and was acclimatized to that area to become
Dutch Passion, Holland

one of the first pure indica outdoor strains the country

Pure Indica

ever had. They are a lot less likely to make a movie from

Potency: THC 14.5%

this story, but that doesn’t make it any less fascinating.

dutch-passion.nl

In breeding this strain to be perfect for the Dutch climate,
the growers also made it heavily resistant to mold and

to cold weather - a kind of warrior of the plant world, if you will. Though it won’t grow
beyond 2 feet tall, Holland’s Hope is very sturdy and reliable, with a strong structure
and a fantastic yield. Thankfully for my imagined nation of Dutch tokers, Holland’s
Hope finished in a short 8 weeks (although we all know that’s the equivalent of a year
when you’ve got nothing to smoke) and outdoors it will finish in the first week of Oc¬
tober. The size of its final harvest can vary greatly according to the conditions it’s
grown in, but at the top of the scale it’s not unusual for one well-grown and much¬
loved plant to give 1000 grams of bud at the end of its cycle. These buds can actually
reach 20 inches in length, which is enough to make even the most confident of male
stoners feel a little threatened.
This strain will get even the most hardened smokers absolutely wiped; the taste is
very sugary and the stone is mega heavy, lasting up to several hours before it allows
you to slide effortlessly into sleep. Hang on - easy to grow, reliable, a massive yielder
and a huge couch-locker? If it ever comes down to an apocalypse, this strain really
might be Holland’s - and the world’s - only Hope!
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2

Holland’s Female Seeds are phenomenally dedicated to perfecting their strains. This
strain not only comprises genetics from the Skunk Special, White Widow, Aurora Indica and Blueberry lines, but it has been backcrossed and cubed for 12 generations,
making it an insanely stable plant that gives fantastically uniform crops.
Although ICE is primarily an indoor strain, it can grow outdoors in a Mediterranean
climate without any problems, and will be finished in 8 weeks in this kind of environ¬
ment. As you would expect from Female Seeds, these
plants are very resistant to stress and it’s almost impos¬
sible to get them to hermie. A top yield of around 750
grams per plant means that ICE is a good choice for
commercial grows as well as smaller medical grows,
and people who only want to bother with a couple of

PHOTOS BY MR. WAGS

crops each year.
ICE is a great indica strain, in that it’s a full on body
Female Seeds,

stone with a long-lasting life. Lovers of the more sedate

Holland

type of high will absolutely love this strain. If you’re look-

Indica-Dominant

ing for the strain to smoke before you sit down with the

Genetics: Skunk Special

Wire box set, then pick up some ICE!

x White Widow x Aurora
Indica x Blueberry
(stabilized for 12
generations)

Potency: THC 18%
femaleseeds.nl

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
70

I

V

& l'*r

Ice Cream
There isn’t a tastier-sounding strain than Paradise Seeds’ Ice Cream - unless some¬
one’s created a Bacon and Eggs strain that I don’t know about, in which case, I’m
going to spend the next month smoking myself to high heaven on that bad boy. In the
mean time, I’ll continue to treat myself with this enigmatic hybrid from one of Holland’s
premier seed companies.
Ice Cream expresses numerous phenotypes, each of which grows quicker than a
Dutch kid hitting puberty. It’s a fantastic choice for a SOG set up, though you’ll have to
move quickly or one day you’ll open the door to your grow room and be caught in the
tangle of pot plants like a fly in an especially sticky spider web. An indoor Ice Cream
grow can give up to 500 grams per square yard of grow room after 60 days, while out¬
doors in early October your harvest can give you upwards of 500 grams per plant.
While some phenotypes of Ice Cream are stronger than others, every one of them
exhibits the impossibly creamy flavor that gives this strain its name. It’s somewhere
between vanilla and raspberry ripple, and unlike the real
Paradise Seeds, Holland

thing, won’t make you horribly fat or leave you with

Indica-Dominant

melted cream dripping down your fingers. It will leave you

Genetics: Unknown

feeling balanced, relaxed and quite focused, and you will

Hybrid

probably be reaching for more as soon as you finish it.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
72

Iranian G-13
It’s OK; I know you’re excited just by seeing the name of this strain. Admit it! I saw
your eyes widen when you turned the page! That’s a fairly common reaction when
any G-13 strain comes around - after all, we all know it as the strain that the govern¬
ment tried to suppress. However, when you factor in the knowledge that this strain
not only encompasses a landrace strain straight from Iran but was also formulated
by Canada’s fantastic Dr. Greenthumb, the excitement levels go through the roof.
This strain promises an even larger yield than the Iranian Autoflower, though of
course it will need a change of light schedule to make it flip into flowering unlike its
Iranian counterpart. Indoors, it will grow to 2 feet tall if you force it into flowering at a
height of 8 inches. A plant of this size will yield up to 600 grams per square yard of
grow space. Outdoors, the yields are even higher, with a 5-foot-tall plant giving up to
a whopping 1500 grams! Yes, you read that right! It will finish in mid-September, and
has good resistance to frost - not that you give a shit: it yields 1500 grams!
Your enormous pile of Iranian G-13 buds will keep
Dr. Greenthumb Seeds,

you locked to whatever comfortable seating arrange¬

Canada

ment you have for the whole next year. You’d better

Indica-Dominant

arrange for some sort of pizza delivery service as well

Genetics: G-13 x Iranian

as liposuction, ‘cos you ain’t getting off that chair, son!

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
74

rukandji
Inkognyto over at Illuminati Seeds must be a secret marine biologist or some shit like
that. I had absolutely no idea what this strain was named after when I first heard of it,
and thought it was the sound someone made when they had a cold and sneezed. A
quick Google turned into a whole afternoon of reading about the tiny and ridiculously
venomous Australian Irukandji Jellyfish - or, rather, reading about the seriously hor¬
rible and equally fascinating effects of their sting. Irukandji stings result in Irukandji
syndrome, the symptoms of which can range from the generic sickness and nausea
to desperate feelings of impending doom and pain that is so extreme that even with
the highest possible dose of morphine, it has led some to say they wish they could
rip their skin off. Right...
I sincerely hope that the fantastic Inkognyto named this strain not because the
high is similar to the organs-on-fire, childbirth-like effects it gives, but because its par¬
ent strains are also named after things equally as terrifying; Mamba and Pestilience.
mmmmmmmmmmmmmammmmmmmmm

If there was a Hall of Fame for scary sounding cannabis

Illuminati Seeds by

strains, all three of these would be in there, but thank¬

Inkognyto, USA

fully this plant is a lot nicer than it sounds, with genetics

Indica-Dominant

of Bubba Kush and ChemDog in there somewhere. This

Genetics: Mamba x

plant can be grown easily in a variety of scenarios, with

Pestilence

coco coir, soil and Deep Water Cultures set ups all work¬

Potency: THC 18-20%

ing well, although the breeder recommends hydro for the

cannazon.net

best possible results. If you’re pushed for space, this can
survive even in a Hempy solo cup grow, although it does

have a tendency to stretch if its kept too far away from the lights. Supercropping and
lollipopping this strain can both work very well, and should both be done just before
you flip the plants into flowering. The yield will be huge, with white frosty buds that
look almost too good to be true. Don’t worry though, they’re not a sting-induced hal¬
lucination - although the purple platypuses (platypi?) wearing monocles that are
crawling up your grow room might be.
No matter how much Irukjandi you smoke, you will not end up thrashing around
on a hospital bed, begging someone to kill you - at least not as far as I know. You
will, however, find yourself with beads of cold sweat on your forehead and with your
muscles shaking a little. It’s an extremely potent strain but that’s not the only kicker:
it also tastes like coffee and chocolate, and the smoke goes down so smooth a bowl
feels like a real treat. Just don’t get too high and go swimming in Australia!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
76

Jackpot Royale
The USA’s AlphaKronik Genetics are, to my mind, one of the better new-school seed
companies currently working out of North America. They always seem to work with
interesting genetics, and in my line of work it’s always a thrill when you come across
a hybrid whose parent plants you’ve never even heard of. I’ve been aware of Spacequeen, the plant that fathers this strain, for a long while, but I’ve never before had the
joy of smoking a Las Vegas Purple Kush. The breeders at AlphaKronik chose this
mother strain as they wanted to create a plant that would taste just like “grape-creme”
soda, and when combined with the vanilla from the Spacequeen father, they got just
what they wanted!
Jackpot Royale was created in a very organic manner, with the plants allowed to
pollinate each other in the open air. This organic mindset is best carried throughout
the entire grow period, although you can grow this strain in other set ups if you really
want to. The organic method will ensure that you preserve the grape-creme taste
that the breeders were striving for, and growing out¬
AlphaKronik Genetics,

doors will help you get the largest possible yield from

USA

this plant. In can also be grown indoors, though, with a

Indica-Dominant

maximum height of around 4 feet. There is usually a lit¬

Genetics: Las Vegas

tle more stretch, up to 25% more, when the crop is

Purple Kush x

flipped into the flowering period, but if space is an issue

Spacequeen F2

for you, you can always keep the vegetative stage a lit¬

Potency: THC 21%

tle shorter. Jackpot Royale has very strong branching

facebook.com/alphakronik

and root growth, and the breeders recommend letting

basilbush.co.uk

the soil go dry before watering again. The flowering time
of this strain is around 70 days, which translates to the

middle of October for outdoor grows. You can expect a medium-high harvest, and
the nugs will astound you by looking like golf balls that have been accidentally hit
into a water hazard filled with purple sherbet. This strain is particularly good for the
ice-water extraction method, if you’re that way inclined.
Along with that grape-creme soda taste that the AlphaKronik breeders were so set
on creating (and rightly so), Jackpot Royale smells like an Eton Mess; a British dessert
consisting of strawberries, meringue and heaps and heaps of thick cream. The smoke
is just as delicious, and the stone is very strong. This is also a great strain for those
with medical conditions such as insomnia, anxiety, wasting diseases, migraines and
chronic pain. It’s not often good medicine tastes like an amazing dessert!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
78

gl^Wwp:." ’ *$'
‘.
"Sttft ■** V^jSHEiiJir''''
~ sf^- ■*si% -IfMiiBit *"*< »r^y
jEMT
JuFV
mSet
...vgak**#')...sifefgi
**■!
'
Erif^&iSalBriiltfk*,/ $»*jg * •< *•; ;
flmRh

ih

tB&nJffl&Klki. ]&r4

'i

nS*,

t-iu# \'

<;§!£La'*& mu*. ■<

Jade Superfrosty
At first I thought that this strain was named after my high school crush and the cold
reception she gave me when I told her I was so in love with her that I wanted to push
her face into mine, but then I realized that USA’s fabulous medical collective Red Star
Farms weren’t around then so they couldn’t have known my lovelife shame. Instead,
Jade Superfrosty is a blend of Superfrost OG and a Vanilla Luna plant that’s so cov¬
ered in white trichomes that you’d think someone had left your buds outside on a par¬
ticularly snowy night.
This is a 90% indica strain, so it is a fantastic choice for indoor growers and it won’t
grow beyond a couple of feet in height but will bush out nicely to be a great little
yielder. Strong stems and a heavy structure mean that it can hold its own weight even
at the end of the flowering period, and the fat leaves mean you won’t be able to tear
your eyes away from it! The plants should be finished in about 9 weeks or even a little
less, and your yield will be medium to heavy.
The vanilla taste of the parent plant is unmistakable
Red Star Farms, USA

in this strain, as is the sourness of the OG heritage.

Indica-Dominant

When the taste of vanilla ice cream finally subsides,

Genetics; Superfrost OG

you’ll notice that the stone is pure indica; all numb body

x Vanilla Luna

and confused brain - and isn’t that just how we like it?

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2

■■

t

uK’y'

Kandy Kush
With a name like Kandy Kush you almost expect this strain to come all fluffy and pink
and wrapped round a stick, which would certainly be a novel way to consume
cannabis but it might be a little dry. Thankfully, the name of this plant refers to the way
it tastes and smokes rather than the way it is served. Holland’s Reserva Privada al¬
ready have a solid reputation for producing strains that go beyond the pale, and with
this cross between OG Kush and Trainwreck they have certainly proved that that rep¬
utation is well deserved.
Kandy Kush is an almost perfect hybrid of its two parent plants, in that it preserves
the best traits of both of them and makes each one better. In terms of growing, this plant
stretches just like a real OG Kush plant but then fills that structure out just like a Trainwreck. It won’t be as tall as a true sativa, but it will take up more room than your other
indica-dominant plants. The branching of Kandy Kush means that it can work well with
a SOG or ScrOG technique, although outdoor growers would be best advised to let it
grow as it sees fit - and it will be a gorgeous plant to be¬
Reserva Privada, Holland

hold when its allowed to grow in the earth and behave

Indica-Dominant

just as it wants to! Kandy Kush, in my opinion, grows best

Genetics: OG Kush x

without excessive use of nutrients and stressful training

Train Wreck (T4)

techniques; a good quality soil and some good, natural

Potency: THC 19%

sunlight at the very best ways to get the most fantastic

dnagenetics.com

Kandy Kush you could hope for. The flowering period, too,
is a little longer than usual, sitting at around 10 weeks to

ensure the plants are properly ready, but when your crops give an average yield of up
to 550 grams per square meter of grow space, you can’t really complain!
If you haven’t had the pleasure of smoking Trainwreck before, I can tell you that it
is about the only strain that’s guaranteed to settle down a group of drunk 20-somethings. I regularly keep Trainwreck on hand for when my buddies get a little too drunk

PHOTOS BY UNKNOWNPROPHET

and rowdy; a quick smoking session around the corner and suddenly they’re all as
timid as kittens. This great (and useful) effect is kept in tact in Kandy Kush, with the
added benefit of the OG kush taste and smell. These buds smell lemony and give an
equally delicious smoke, with an immediately-hitting high that is as more-ish as it is
strong. It’s impossible not to come back from a second round of Kandy Kush, even
though just the first toke gets you as high as a kite that’s been caught by the wind
and now lingers somewhere around the bottom end of the moon. It’s a good job it’s
not served on a stick, or we might never be able to stop!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
82

Kushman’s Silverback
Grape Ape

■HMMHHHMMMMmHMMMHBHMMMNBMI

The pioneer of his own veganics grow style, Kyle Kushman is known worldwide for
his cultivation skills and for amazing genetics like this strain, which is a variation on
the Grape Ape plant. Having grown out three different phenotypes of the original plant,
Kyle selected his favorite from the set and bred it out with his veganics style to create
a 65% indica strain with its amazing flavor nurtured and enhanced!
As a strong indica dominant, this plant is short and stocky and will rarely need
staking until the very end of the flowering period, if at all. This strain is a good choice
for an outdoor grow, as it is quite resistant to powdery mildew and changes in tem¬
perature as long as they’re not too extreme. After 60-65 days of flowering they should
be ready for the chop, if you can keep your hands off them that long!
Kushman’s veganics style is known for preserving the
Kyle Kushman, USA

flavor of buds and keeping away that nasty chemical taste,

Indica-Dominant

so it makes sense that Silverback Grape Ape tastes ab-

Genetics: Grape Ape

solutely amazing. The high is just as good, with a balanced

(Kushman’s Cut)

effect that tends slightly towards a killer body stone.

Potency: THC 18%

|

KushmanVeganics.com J
budsandrosesla.com

*

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
84

L.A. Ultra x Bubblicious
Their company might only be a few years old, but the breeders over at Spain’s Resin
Seeds certainly know what they’re doing. They’ve been active in the scene in Europe
for some years now, and they know a damn good breeding strain when they see one
- or, in this case, two! L.A. Ultra is said to be a mix of L.A. Confidential and MK Ultra,
while the Bubblicious is a blend of original Bubblegum and an FI Lavender male plant
that is know for its taste as well as its effects. By breeding these two plants together
Resin Seeds have created an insanely tasty strain that punches far above its weight
with its killer high!
As both parent plants are indica-dominant, L.A. Ultra x Bubblicious is a plant that
leans strongly towards the indica side of things. This means that your crop will be ideal
for an indoor grow or a guerilla grow outdoors, as the plants will be short and compact,
almost as if they’re hiding from the cops or potential pot thieves! Don’t think, though,
that because they’re so inconspicuous they aren’t as special as some of the more flashy
strains; this plant is one that has bags of personality and
Resin Seeds, Spain

is a lot of fun to grow. The bushy plants react well to a

Indica-Dominant

whole host of techniques, including LST and topping, al¬

Genetics: L.A. Ultra x

though you should figure out which one best suits your

Bubblicious

grow room and your grow style before you go ahead and

Potency: THC 18%

start cutting things off. It can be grown both indoors and

resinseeds.net

outdoors and in hydro as well as soil, although to make
sure that awesome taste isn’t adulterated with chemicals

you might choose an organic soil grow. Whether you grow organic or not, it’s always a
good idea to do an extensive flush before harvest and maybe even use molasses to
get rid of any chemically residue. Harvest will be around the 8 week mark with this plant,
which translates to the end of September for outdoor growers in the Northern hemi¬
sphere. Indoor growers can expect to harvest around 425 grams per square meter of
grow space, while outdoor growers will be treated to around 300 grams per plant.
L.A. Ultra and Bubblicious has a double-pronged attack on your senses, so get
ready to be conquered by this most hectic of indica-dominant strains! Not only does
the candy-sweet flavor of the Bubblicious parent come through really strongly in both
the aroma of the buds and the sweetness of the smoke, but the strength, warmth and
noticeable longevity of the L.A. Ultra parent means that the high hits you right between
the eyes, leaving you reeling for quite some time like Wile E Coyote after he’s been
hit with his own badly-placed anvil.

, Cannabis Sndica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
86

Lady Purple
Holland’s De Sjamaan Seeds always have my attention, as they have a great track
record for producing very interesting strains with even better names. Even their
more “usual” strains go far beyond where other seed companies dare to tread, and
this, one of their Kush strains, is a testament to their inventiveness. For Lady Purple,
an Afghani Hindu Kush plant was crossed with a Purple Kush straight from the U.S.,
creating a strain that’s as easy to grow as it is to smoke, and is as beautiful as it is
effective!
Your experience in growing cannabis and your desired results from Lady Purple
should dictate whether you grow this strain indoors or outdoors, as it can grow hap¬
pily in either. Beginner growers, or those looking to have a very simple grow that
gives them great results, should cultivate this plant indoors, where it is ridiculously
easy to grow and will give a good return on investment of both time and money.
Those who have more experience growing weed and are looking for the largest pos¬
sible harvest will want to grow outdoors, where yields
De Sjamaan Seeds,

are increased but so is the level of difficulty. Lady Purple

Holland

prefers moderate climates, and doesn’t appreciate

Indica-Dominant

harsh changes in temperature. There is a Jamaican

Genetics: Afghani/Hindu

sativa in this plant’s family tree, so you can expect it to

Kush x US Purple Kush

sit a little taller than many other indicas at around 5 feet.

Potency: THC 17%

This also extends the plant’s flowering time to 70 days

sjamaan.com

rather than 60, but this is no problem at all when your
finished product is of such high quality. When your

plants are done, you’ll have no doubt where the name Lady Purple sprang from; this
plant is purple all over! The green leaves will display purple striping, but most striking
are the flowers, so purple you’d think they’d been dipped in violet paint and glued
back onto the plant. At harvest time, which is the first week of October for outdoor
growers, you can expect to get around 300 grams per square yard of grow room;
and after harvest, you can expect to make some absolutely killer finger hash, as
these incredibly resinous buds will have left lots of crystals on your hands!
The finished Lady Purple buds will smell almost like a bonfire in the night air. Sounds
crazy, but it’s true; the scents of pine and wood mix with a deeper, smoky aroma as
well as a slight fruitiness. The effects of this strain are very indica heavy, with a very
strong body stone coming on almost straightaway. Couch lock lovers will really appre¬
ciate this strain, and will be reaching for the bong again before too long!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
88

»w

*# * * **

t

•* «

Lavender
mmifmsmmm

S*8ftKf&S&fr8%8%(££

Lavender, to my mind, is something that old women smell of, and something that peo¬
ple put in those really weird little pillows that you’re meant to put in the microwave.
Every true stoner, though, will know Lavender as a fantastic Super Skunk x Big Skunk
Korean x Afghani Hawaiian cross from Soma Seeds. This strain really encompasses
some of the best genetics from across the globe without losing out on great taste,
and any fan of purple strains will be a huge fan of Lavender.
Despite being an indica-dominant strain, this plant displays a few traits that are
more typical of sativa-heavy hybrids; it takes 9 to 10 weeks to flower and grows quite
leggy. Soma himself recommends that, if you are growing in a SOG set up or simply
want to keep your plants short, you should shorten the vegetative period to keep
Lavender relatively small. Either way, your yield will be medium but the buds will be
amazingly purple!
The Afghani heritage of this strain comes through heavily in the smoke, which tastes
almost exactly like good hash and gives a tingly body
Soma Seeds, Holland

stone that reaches up and touches the brain gently, too.

Indica-Dominant

I’d rather have a smoke that smells like hash than an old

Genetics: Super Skunk x

lady’s perfume any day, and I bet this Lavender relaxes

Big Skunk Korean x

you a hell of a lot more than a stupid hot pillow as well.

Afghani Hawaiian
Potency: THC 19%
somaseeds.eu

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
90

-&*!**'Ik.,

I

Lebanese Bekaa
Lebanon isn’t exactly the first place that many of us would think of when we think of
killer weed, but this is entirely an oversight on our part, as the Lebanese strains in this
guide show. And who better to give us an education in previously overlooked cannabis
strains than Weed.co.za, the fantastic South African breeders and growers who’ve al¬
ready schooled us in the nuances of strains from their glorious native country?
This strain is a true landrace indica from Lebanon, although unlike many landrace
strains, it is quite easy to grow. Cultivators recommend both topping and training to
make the grow even simpler. The vegetative stage naturally stays quite short, stunting
the growth somewhat, and the flowering stage should be continued until the leaves
are practically dead - around the 12-week mark. This may seem a little odd, but it will
ensure the most perfect Lebanese Bekaa smoke you could hope for. Though the orig¬
inal breeder who nurtured this fantastic strain has unfortunately passed away, he gave
huge credit to the Spanish cannabis community for the successful domestication of
this plant, and so should we.
Weed.co.za, South Africa

As a landrace indica, Lebanese Bekaa will absolutely

Pure Indica

freeze both your body and your brain in a warm cuddle;

Genetics: Landrace

think of it as lovely numbness, because you’ll feel lovely

Lebanese Indica

but you won’t be able to think of much else.

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
92

Lebanese Landrace
Spain’s Alpine Seeds continue to rise in my estimation - which is no mean feat, con¬
sidering that they’re already pretty high up there! They’re known and much revered in
the cannabis community for their highly stabilized niche strains, and you can’t get much
more niche than pure landrace strains from Lebanon. This Middle Eastern country is
actually a hotbed of fantastic cannabis genetics and, much like Morocco, the plants
that grow there natively are very similar to the plants that grow in the Hindu Kush in
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Cannabis grows mainly in the Bekaa plateau in Lebanon,
as well as the coastal areas of the country, and this is exactly where this plant will have
initially been found. Alpine Seeds proudly preserves this fascinating genetic specimen,
and are saving this amazing plant for possible use as breeding stock.
This Lebanese Landrace will surprise you when growing, as it reaches a slightly
taller height than many of its Kush counterparts. It won’t grow all that much higher,
but it can certainly reach 3 or 4 feet and it won’t take its time to get there. Shooting
up very quickly at the start of the vegetative stage, your
Alpine Seeds, Spain

crop might leave you a little worried that it will outgrow

Pure Indica

your grow space, but don’t worry; it will even out and

Genetics: Landrace

stay moderately sized, and grow gorgeous long colas

Lebanese Indica

that will have you taking glamour shots of your plants

Potency: THC 16-17%

and drooling over them later. Another positive surprise

alpine-seeds.net

is the very high calyx-to-leaf ratio, which not only makes
your plants that little more beautiful but means that,

come harvest time, people will be begging to help you harvest. Lebanese Landrace
plants are very hardy, and can resist temperature fluctuations as well as extremes of
cold or warm, depending on where they’re grown. In its native country, cannabis is
grown mainly for the production of hash, so if you find yourself with a Lebanese Lan¬
drace grow you’d be a damn fool not to have at least a full day of hash-making from
your fantastic plants. Even finger hash can be an amazing treat, but if you have the
time to make some bubble hash, you won’t be disappointed!
As your Lebanese Landrace plants finish, they’ll have hints of brown and red in
the buds and will be particularly resinous. They will smell extremely hashy with hints
of oil and spice, but the smoke itself will be unexpectedly sweet with a very distinct
aroma. Whether you smoke up the buds or treat yourself to some hash, you’ll end up
i

with a very balanced and clear high that will have you searching for flights to Beirut
and packing your cleanest bong.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
94

Mango
mmmtmmmmmmmsmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmnmuiaaam

WBSOBSS

When I was visiting Australia a couple of years ago, chilling out and smoking some
great pot in Australia’s cannabis capital, Nimbin, I got a little bit too used to eating
their amazing fruits. The mangoes that come down from Queensland are pure little
rays of sunlight, so juicy and delicious that I could easily eat 5 a day. Upon leaving
Aus, I thought that otherworldly mango taste had left my mouth forever - until I first
smoked Homegrown Fantaseeds’ amazing Mango.
A cross between KC33 and an Afghani indica, Mango is a very strong indica-dominant strain with just enough sativa influence to make it fun. This dose of sativa means
that the flowering time is slightly extended to 8 weeks, or early October if you’re grow¬
ing guerilla, and it means that the plants are slightly taller than they might be but still
short enough to easily be grown to full term indoors. Be sure not to overwater your
crop and always watch out for mold, but otherwise you can just enjoy looking at your
beautiful plants until harvest rolls around!
■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■

That first bite of Queensland mango comes rushing

Homegrown Fantaseeds,

back to me when I get my first lungful of Mango smoke;

Holland

the succulent juiciness, the subtle sweetness, and the

Indica-Dominant

pure euphoria of such an amazing taste. This strain gets

Genetics: KC 33 x

you glued to the couch and high as a kite! Winner!

Afghani
Potency: THC 19%
homegrownfantaseeds.com

Cannabis Indies The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
96

It

Master Thai’s Green
Dragon BX7
The USA’s Master Thai is an absolutely fantastic breeder with many years of experi¬
encing influencing his strains. He works with only the best genetics, like the landrace
Turkish indica and landrace Afghani indica plants that date back to 1974 and make
up Green Dragon BX7.
This highly stable plant enjoys SOG and ScrOG set ups, as well as soil grows
treated with coco coir and bat guano, as recommended by the breeder. Growers
should keep the feeding light, and enhance the soil with seaweed and worm castings.
Best results occur if the plants are left in vegetative mode for slightly longer than nor¬
mal and are not fed for 15 days before harvest, with a full flush. Plants can give 200
grams indoors or 340 grams outdoors.
Master Thai’s Green Dragon BX7 is hands down the

Master Thai Seeds, USA

best medical strain I’ve ever come across if you’re deal¬

Pure Indica

ing with chronic pain. It’s also a killer smoke if you’re

Genetics: Landrace

dealing with nothing but a craving for some absolutely

Turkish Indica x Landrace

amazing weed that tastes like fruit!

Afghan Indica

Potency: THC 22-25%
masterthai.com

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
98

Mau-Mau
Spain’s The Blazing Pistileros are a great young seed company who have some se¬
riously fringe genetics with which to create their awesome strains. Mau Mau, which I
originally thought was named after the group that orchestrated an uprising in Kenya
in 1952 (everyone knows about that, right?), was created from two equally enigmatic
strains; Block Head and an F6 version of Killa Queen. It’s actually named after the
great graffiti artist from London, who loved the strain so much that he designed the
seed packaging! Super cool? I think so.
Like Mau-Mau himself, this strain is super chill. Easy to grow, quick and not afraid
of giving a good harvest, Mau-Mau is a plant that will suit beginner growers as well
as experienced cultivators. It’s not sensitive to fertilizers and the breeders recommend
using an organic soil grow for the best results. You can easily get 35 grams of pre¬
mium bud per plant, after 60 days of flowering under a 400 watt HID lamp, which is
more than enough for any hobby grower!
The finished buds will have turned golden in flower¬
The Blazing Pistileros,

ing and so will look like nugs of rock solid gold hanging

Spain

off your plant! The smoke is smooth and the taste is

Indica-Dominant

pleasant, but it’s the high that’s the real kicker; a real in-

Genetics: Block Head x

dica body stone with a nice “dancing brain” feeling.

Killa Queen F6
Potency: THC 16.4%
irievibeseeds.com

wm&

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World's Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
100

Meen Green Hillbilly
Marijuana Hillbilly is a popular magazine in the U.S., exploring all facets of cannabis
culture and the medical marijuana lifestyle. This strain was developed in the Ozark
Mountains between Missouri and Arkansas, and named after Meen Green of Swisher
Streets - so it’s a U.S. strain through and through! Since its release in 1998, Meen
Green Hillbilly has been popular in the underground scene, not least because some
heritage seeds from the Ozark Mountains form its basis. These seeds were bred into
Purple Power and White Widow, to give an indica-dominant variety with some sativa
influence and enough of a balanced high to be a useful plant for medical patients.
This strain can be grown pretty much any way, although its 6 to 7 foot stature can
render it too tall for some grow rooms. It is, however, a great choice for a ScrOG
grow and can flourish best in a soil set up. The breeders tell me that this is an easy
plant, so even the most inexperienced of growers can have a pain-free time growing
it. However, it is fun enough that experienced cultivators won’t get bored, and will
react well to the more complex techniques that longtime
Marijuana Hillbilly, USA

growers can bring. It is also resistant to almost all pests

Indica-Dominant

and problems, making it even easier to care for. The

Genetics: Purple Power x

breeders recommend watering twice daily, keeping the

White Widow x Unknown

soil moist but not too wet in between feedings. They

Ozark Heritage Seeds

also recommend feeding your Meen Green Hillbilly crop

Potency: THC 18-20%

with 1 cup of raw sugar per gallon of water during the

marijuanahillbilly.com

flowering period. Do this just once a week, and stop a

team31.net

week before you plan to harvest. After 7 weeks of flow¬
ering, your plants will be fully mature and ready for the

chop. Your grow room or guerilla outdoor grow will be a veritable cacophony of col¬
ors, with purples, greens and oranges fighting with each other for the chance to dis¬
play themselves all over your plants. Purple usually wins out, but not before green
has given it a run for its money! You can expect to harvest 450 grams from each
plant; a huge yield!
The breeders insist that you give this strain a good curing period, and don’t trim
before it’s totally ready. You’ll be rewarded for your obedience with weed that tastes
like sour citrus fruit and just a hint of Skunk. Because the strain is such a balanced
hybrid, the effects depend totally on you; some will find it a total couch-locker, while
others will experience a soaring high that’s very cerebral. Either way, this strain is
very uplifting and works great at combating pain even in small doses.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
102

-

Melon Gum
Dr. Underground is a breeder held in high regard in his native Spain, and its because
of strains like Melon Gum that people continue to think of him as some sort of breeding
genius. It sounds simple — a mix of Soma’s Lavender and Bubblegum from Serious
Seeds - but even the simplest things in life can be done well or done badly, and this
strain has definitely been created by a master of his art.
Flowering in a short 54 days, Melon Gum is like one of those annoying 14 year
olds that’s about 6 foot tall when everyone else in their class is still shopping in the
kid’s section; it peaks early. In fact, if grown in an aero or hydro system the breeder
recommends not allowing for a vegetative period at all — and even then, after 7
weeks you can expect a yield of about 700 grams per square meter of grow space.
Outdoors, you’ll get an absolutely amazing 1000 grams per plant, when grown
straight in the ground. It’s enough to make you run outside covered in camouflage
paint to find a guerilla spot right now!
..

Your resin-coated Melon Gum buds will look good

Dr. Underground, Spain

enough to pop right into your mouth, but don’t take the

Indica-Dominant

Gum name too literally. Pack a bowl of this strain and

Genetics: Bubblegum x

you’ll soon feel like a child chewing a piece of melon-fla-

Lavender

vored candy, and you’ll act much the same way.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
104

Mind Body and Soul (mbs)
Maybe it’s the beautiful expanses of nature at its best that Australian breeders The
Wizards of Oz enjoy in their native land that makes them feel so spiritual, or perhaps
they feel that surfing on the east coast makes them feel particularly centred, just as I
did when I was carving off the Sunshine Coast. Or, perhaps, it’s the quality of their
Australian sativa genetics that gets them off their head and makes them feel all
squidgy inside and brings out the hippy inside of them. It could be any, but what s im¬
portant is that their Mind, Body and Soul strain, created by Moonunit and Wally Duck,
is a great strain with genetics of Deep Chunk, Zoid Fuel and C99 that gives a spiritu¬

PHOTOS BY SLAYER AND WIZARDS OF OZ

ally balanced high!
Though this strain mostly grows like an indica, it can experience some stretch in
the vegetative stage thanks to the sativa influence. It tends to exhibit some spread,
but overall it is easy to grow, as the breeders were aiming for an easy strain with good
medicinal qualities. Plants will take around 70 days to mature and to fully fill out the
dense, white nugs.
The Wizards of Oz,

The high of this strain comes on quickly, giving you

breeders Moonunit and

just enough time to sit back, try to tame your racing mind

Wally Duck, Australia

and eventually realise the best way to bring your Mind,

Indica-Dominant

Body and Soul into alignment.

Genetics: Deep Chunk x
Zoid Fuel x C99

Potency: THC 20%

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
106

-.:M -*/,,;;

Molokai Frost
I have often spoken of my love of Hawaiian strains, so it should come as no surprise
to you that Supreme Beans of the USA have brought out yet another strain that I
think is fantastic. Molokai Frost is a landrace Hawaiian strain from the remote Molokai
Island that is rumored to be in the family history of such famous strains as Diesel
and ChemDawg.
The genetics of this strain were kept secret amongst local growers for over thirty
years before being released to the public. In that time, the growers found that
Molokai Frost grows best outdoors in an organic soil grow, although a clay medium
in buckets also works well. If you are planning to use nutrients, House and Garden
by Van De Zwaan is recommended. These plants will grow between 4 and 6 feet
outdoors, as they have a lot of sativa influence making them stretch upwards, and

PHOTOS BY SOUTH BAY RAY

they will finish in under 10 weeks.
These nugs are very unique in that they smell like hay. Yep, as in hay that horses
eat. They also give a whiff of Diesel and a bit of that
Supreme Beans, USA

Hazy spice, but the smell is mostly fresh. This strain is

Indica-Dominant

very narcotic but, thanks to the sativa influence, has

Genetics: Landrace

enough of a head high to keep you awake and enjoying

Hawaiian

yourself while the effects last!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
108

'jdm

V
k *.

Narkosis
If you have ever been scuba diving then you’ll know what narcosis is. That funny
feeling when you get to a certain depth and you suddenly feel like someone’s given
you 28 shots of Jameson and might even have slipped a hefty dose of ketamine
into your cereal; you aren’t quite sure how you got into the middle of the ocean, you
can’t figure out whether those are fish or fish people like the lizards in Fear and
Loathing in Las Vegas, and you seem to have lost most of the control you previously
enjoyed over your limbs. Though this is a sign that things can get very badly very
quickly in a dive, everyone kinda enjoys it; in fact, when I was diving in Ko Tao in
Thailand, we divers all had shirts with the narcosis logo on it! The clever breeders
over at Spain’s Blim Burn Seeds must know that everyone loves this feeling, as the
effects of their Critical and Somango cross are so similar that I just know this is
going to be every diver’s new favorite pot strain!
Your Narkosis grow will be as green as the day is long, and very attractive to
boot. These medium-sized plants exhibit foxtailing,
Blim Burn Seeds, Spain

which is my absolute favorite trait in cannabis plants

Indica-Dominant

and makes me want to frame up the trees and stare at

Genetics: Critical x

them all day. Don’t get carried away with their looks

Somango

and forget to properly look after them, though; although

Potency: THC 17%

these plants aren’t fussy they’ll still need a little TLC to

blimburnseeds.com

bring the best out of them. Outdoors, you will find that

semillasdemarihuana.net

these are hardy plants that can take a lot of stress and
don’t need to be watered too often. Indoors, the plants

will be a little more needy but won’t require too much effort. You can expect to be
harvesting after 60 days of flowering, which translates to around the end of Sep¬
tember if you’re growing outdoors. The average yield is around 550 grams, and
every single bud will look like a work of art!
The Narkosis buds not only smell as delicious as the fresh fruit you get from a Thai
market place first thing in the morning, but the effects are the same as that amazing
nitrogen narcosis you get on a deep dive. After just a few puffs from a freshly-cleaned
bong you’ll be back in the South China Sea, 100 feet deep and absolutely blitzed out
of your brain. It’s a heady feeling, bringing on a bubble of euphoria, but it also takes
your arms and legs away from your body for a little while. If you’re aching for the feel¬
ing of being right down in the deep blue sea but can’t afford the flight back to Thailand,
get some Narkosis!
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
110

'mKm

Nice Chunk_
Australians have a reputation for straight talking, and having been there, I can tell you
its true. They say what they mean, and they don’t pull any punches - so if the Aussie
breeders at Southern Star Seeds tell you that their strain is a Nice Chunk of some
killer bud, you know it’s the truth! To create this Nice Chunk, these guys have crossed
a female Mr. Nice (yes, I know that sounds strange) with a male B-Chunk plant and
in the process have made a heavy yielding plant with a great taste too.
As with many Australians, Nice Chunk grows to 6 feet and above and enjoys being
outside. Unlike many Australians, it doesn’t drink all that much and smells a little
hashy. This strain will take 8 weeks to flower, and it can be grown in almost any type
of system, although you should bear in mind that it begins as a branchy plant but fills
out after 4 weeks of flowering. Indoor growers should harvest 1.2 grams per single
watt of light in the grow room, whereas outdoor growers, with good conditions and
some luck, should be able to get up to 400 grams from a single plant.
-..Once finished, your huge stash of gorgeous Nice
Southern Star Seeds,

Chunks will smell like hash, but will burn with an earthy

Australia

smell and give a really relaxing but still stimulating head

Indica-Dominant

and body high, topped off with a cheerful, energetic and

Genetics: Mr. Nice (G-13

delightful stone!

Cannabis Indica The Essentia! Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
112

O.Z. Kush
mmmswmMmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmimmsmt&mmmm

/

^

>

' >

*,

-><v

></*■. *a->j

^

wr

Holland’s The Bulldog Seeds are so well established in the Amsterdam scene that
it’s hard to think of that city without thinking of them. The Bulldog was one of the first
coffeeshops to open before the ‘Dam was the tokers paradise we all know and love,
and it’s still there to this day. The owners teamed up with some of the world’s best
breeders to come out with a line of their own Bulldog strains, each one with the quality
you’d expect from such a well-respected brand! This strain, O.Z. Kush, is a version
of America’s favorite plant that has been given the Bulldog treatment. A fantastic Kush
plant was crossed with a particularly intense Silver Haze, that had been much loved
by medical users. The result is a fairly balanced hybrid that leans just over towards
the indica-dominant side and delights both growers and tokers!
Though this plant can be grown both indoors and out, the breeders recommend
an outdoor grow to get the very best out of O.Z. Kush. The crop with have more stretch
than some stronger indica crosses, but it still shouldn’t get beyond an average of 6
feet, even outdoors. A good idea when growing outside
The Bulldog Seeds,

is to stake the plants very early on, to ensure that they

Holland

grow the way you’d prefer them to and also to provide

Indica-Dominant

extra support for the branches all the way through the

Genetics: Kush x Silver

flowering period, when the buds can cause strain on the

Haze

structure. The plant is very indica-like in its colorations,

Potency: THC 17%

and your grow room will look like a real sea of deep

bulldogseeds.nl

green with accents of white, just like the whitewash from
miniature breaking waves. After 10 weeks of flowering

the plants should be ready for harvest, which will be a doddle thanks to the high calyxto-leaf ratio. Both outdoor and indoor growers can expect to yield around 600 grams
per square meter of grow space, which is enough to impress experienced cultivators
as well as newbies!
Your frostly little green and white O.Z. Kush buds will have that tell tale Kush smell
as well as a taste that’s super spicy. This is a great choice for almost all medical users
as the high hits both head and body, so if you have issues with chronic pain but aren’t
the kind of smoker who can tolerate a total couchlocker of a smoke, this strain has
enough get up and go to keep you up and going while still taking the edge off your
pain or the symptoms of your condition. If you’re not a medical user, however, you’ll
love this as a wake n’ bake strain that goes pretty perfectly with a coffee and a crois¬
sant in the mornings!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
114

■

Pacific Coast Kush
The USA’s OG Genetics are my kind of patriotic. Flying the Star Spangled Banner in
your back yard and refusing to go on holiday anywhere other than Florida is all well
and good, but if you want to prove that you’re a true American to me, you’ll play around
with some US genetics and create a plant that’s more ‘merican than a Big Mac and a
KFC bucket meal playing football in front of the White House. That’s just what OG
Genetics have done in bringing together a Phantom OG plant with an L.A. Confiden¬
tial; they’ve brought together two of the finest US strains to create the Captain Amer¬
ican of marijuana: Pacific Coast Kush.
The bad news is that if you’re not in California or Colorado, or you don’t have an
excuse to go visit a “friend” over that side of the country, then you might struggle to
get your hands on some killer Pacific Coast Kush seeds, as they are only really avail¬
able in that area. The good news is that once you do get your grubby little mitts on
them, you’ll be in for a fun ride. Whether you decide to grow these plants indoors or
outdoors, they’re a great little project to have, and exOG Genetics, USA

hibit a relatively short flowering period compared to

Indica-Dominant

many other indica-dominant hybrids. I’ve heard it said

Genetics: Phantom OG x

that a soil grow is absolutely perfect for this strain, but

LA Confidential

a hydro or even aeroponic system can also give pretty

Potency: THC 18%

good results. Growing in 1 or even 2 gallon pots would

oggenetics.com

be the best option for most hobby growers. Pacific
Coast Kush crops will stay short and compact, while

turning deeper and deeper green over time. The dense nugs of these plants can
sometimes fall victim to mold, given that they are so weighty and air can struggle to
get through them. Keep en eye on your crops for any sign of moldy buds. Also watch
out for powdery mildew on your plants, but with proper care and good ventilation,
these problems shouldn’t arise. Towards the end of flowering you’ll notice the pistils
turning a deep orange, which should be a sign that the 8 weeks flowering time is
drawing to a close and harvest time is now!
If you’ve ever smoked O.G. Kush then you’ll find that this strain whisks you right
back in time to the first time you smoked up that particular plant, expect with a vague
sense of reverse deja-vu; something is just a little different. The difference here is the
L.A. Confidential influence that brings in a nice little cerebral tingle and a calmness to
the numbing Kush smoke. This is a strain that every true American, and every fan of
US genetics, will love as much as pumpkin pie!

Cannabis Sndica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
116

siUv

Papa’s Candy
Spain’s Eva Female Seeds are infinitely likeable. Not only are they fun and knowl¬
edgeable in person, but their strains are the same: fun to grow, interesting, and de¬
lightful to chill with! Papa’s Candy is a cross between a White Pakistani plant and a
landrace strain from Laos, so this one is destined to be even more interesting than
the rest of Eva Female Seeds’ catalog - and that’s quite a feat!
Although this strain isn’t fully stabilized, all phenotypes are very similar in consti¬
tution and growing styles with a strong, hardy stem and a robust plant structure. This
strength means that the plant can be grown both indoors and outdoors without being
ravaged by the elements outside or being weakened by the lack of breeze indoors.
Papa’s Candy also stays short and squat throughout its whole growth period, so it’s
great for both indoor grows and balcony grows in the city - although growers with the
latter should be sure that you can’t see the plants from above. This is also a fantastic
strain for those, like me, who have little patience, especially when they see their gor¬
geous plants growing, as Papa’s Candy finishes fully in
Eva Female Seeds,

6 to 7 weeks indoors. Outdoors, you should expect to

Spain

harvest around the middle of October, depending on

Indica-Dominant

where you are growing. Flarvesting earlier than normal,

Genetics: Laotian

for example, after 45 days, will give you a much more

Landrace x White

psychedelic high from this strain, so those that enjoy a

Pakistani

touch of sativa influence in their indica smoke would be

Potency: THC 17-19%

well advised to chop early. Those that like to leave the

evaseeds.com

harvest until later will enjoy buds sticky with resin and
bright with orange-red colors.

If you’re a fan of licorice then you’ll love this strain, as not only do the buds smell
of anise but the smoke tastes of it, too! This flavor also has hints of summer fruits,
making the whole thing taste like one of those awesome candies you had all the time
when you were a kid but that don’t seem to exist now that you’re all grown up. Papa’s
Candy is also a great strain for medical users, as it can help alleviate the symptoms
of asthma as well as giving relief from chronic pain, autoimmune diseases and in¬
flammation in the joints. As previously mentioned, you can manipulate your Papa’s
Candy plants to give you your preferred type of high, depending on when you harvest
them. Early harvest will give a very active high that hits the head as well as the body,
whereas a later harvest will give a body stone with just a hint of mindfulness. Pick
your favorite!
Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
118

Point of No Return
Mandala Seeds, based in Spain, are clearly partial to smoking in the same way that
I arp _ by that, I mean excessively. We’ve all been there: you put down the bong after
your millionth hit and completely miss the table, smashing your favorite piece of glass¬
ware and getting bong water all over the cat - and you can’t get up to do anything
about it. That, my friends, is the point of no return, and this amazing blend of landrace
Afghani and landrace Mexican genetics will take you there again!
With a flowering time of 70 days, this is a medium strain in both length and height,
and it gives a fantastically uniform crop with huge cone-shaped buds. The buds are
distinctly airy, though, making them resistant to mold more than their denser counter¬
parts. Expect a harvest of 100 grams per plant in a greenhouse or a huge 1000 grams
per plant outdoors!
The complete and utter incapacitation that many of us know and love is exactly
what you will get from Point of No Return. This strain is a medical-grade medication
with a massive indica body stone, and if you’re a medical
Mandala Seeds, Spain

marijuana user you’ll find it can help with chronic pain,

Indica-Dominant

MS, muscular spasms and sleep disorders. Everyone

Genetics: Landrace

else will find it helps you accidentally break your favorite

Afghani x Landrace

bongs and laugh at shitty TV.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2

ki/1^63? (£
f&lispirfv 'V -a^
) \\ f^Sl^Kijj^;fir’ll
Kj^n#
• jgPaC"

p

*

* ^^gBr^s

JB

1 ' * a^ j-sJ

hhbst ■
iiL
dSL'M *
femajL^

• r

•

fyPWl
|fl|

■-'

- ,.Jc

i;

3P

Pollen Chuck
I’m excited to be able to feature some Belgian genetics in this book, as I am a huge
fan of their beers and Georges LemaTtre - yeah, I bet you have to Google that one!
This strain by Core Seeds, which is a three-way cross between Purple Doja, PeeWee and a delicious Sour Diesel plant is now being grown out by the awesome
dudes at Canada’s OGA Seeds, making it available to more North Americans - so
thank you, OGA!
The breeders recommend a SOG grow for this particular plant, as it exhibits the
Christmas-tree shape that suits that grow style so well. This strain is a light feeder,
but it should be topped and trained to get the best out of it. It’s also sensitive to
changes in pH and should be kept in a medium humidity, as high humidity can bring
about mold into the dense buds. Indoors in 2 gallon pots, each plant can yield up to
45 grams of dry bud, which is not too shabby at all for a hobby grower. This plant
will be ready for that all-important chop at around 11 weeks of flowering.
The fruity, oily smell of this strain will give way to a
Core Seeds, Belgium,

grape taste and a couchlocker of a stone that’s even

grown by OGA Seeds,

more potent when smoked through a vaporizer. Sit

Canada

down with a Belgian beer and say thank you to the Bel¬

Indica-Dominant

gians - or, as they would say, “Dank uwel!”

Genetics: Purple Doja x
PeeWee x Sour Diesel
Potency: THC 19%
ogas.ca

mmm

■

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2

iSr

Purple Afghani
The USA’s TreeTown Seeds are a great collective proudly based in the Bay Area in
California. Their Purple Afghani strain was created from one of the most famous
strains ever to come out of the Bay: Purple Kush from Trichome Technologies. They
got their keen hands on one of the first available Purple Kush clones in 2004 from
Oakland’s Blue Sky, then bred it with Afghani #1 from Sensi Seeds in order to smooth
out the mold problem that often affects Purple Kush...and they succeeded!
This strain improves upon the great work done by Trichome Technologies by in¬
creasing the size of the trichomes, making the buds more airy and making this wicked
plant even easier to grow. This plant won’t grow beyond 3 feet, and about 40% of the
plants will be Purple Kush dominant, making them deep purple with a grape taste.
Plants will be finished in 53 days and will give 350 grams of bud per square meter of
grow space, or 460 grams outdoors.
The silky smooth smoke with heavy aromas of grape and purple candy goes all
the way down past your lungs, sets up camp in your legs
TreeTown Seeds, USA

and glues them right to the couch. Don’t expect to get

Indica-Dominant

your body back any time soon, as this heavy indica

Genetics: (Trichome

stone is hanging out there for a while and he won’t be

Technologies Purple Kush x

shifted without a serious fight!

Sensi Seeds Afghani #1) FI

Potency: THC 12-16%
treetownseeds.com
harborsidehealthcenter.com

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
124

Purple Elegance
Gage Green Genetics are a wicked seed company from the U.S. who are masters
at bringing together some of the more fringe strains to create fantastic hybrids, just
like this one. Purple Elegance is a blend of Purple Elephant and Joseph OG Kush
genetics, the former of which was passed down from the late, great breeder JojoRizo (R.I.P.).
Like all the best things in life, Purple Elegance takes a little effort to get. She is not
a fan of heat, and prefers environments that are both relatively cool and fairly well
controlled, meaning that growing outdoors is out for most people. Don’t worry though,
because she’ll fit right into your grow room without much fuss, and doesn’t need too
much feeding. Organic nutrients will work best with this strain, as well as pruning.
However, you’ll need to stake these plants early on as the additional bud sites mean
the buds often get too heavy for the branches. Don’t worry though - this is great news
for your final harvest, which will be nothing short of plentiful!
Your Purple Elegance buds will be rock hard and covGage Green Genetics,

ered in purple stripes, and they’ll smell of fuel and

USA

grapes. The resulting smoke will set up a fine cloud in

Indica-Dominant

your head and refuse to leave for several hours — a bit

Genetics: Purple Elephant

like a hangover, but a hell of a lot more fun!

x Joseph OG Kush

Potency: THC 17-19%

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
126

Purple Fuck V2
I know what you’re thinking; Purple Fuck is what you had on that crazy Wednesday
evening a few years back when you went to your friend s art studio, got a little drunk
and ended up fumbling in the middle of a pile of paint. Though the memory of that is
as persistent as that oil paint was on your pubic hair, this strain isn’t referring to that.
No, this Purple Fuck is a great strain from everyone’s favorite, the USA’s Riot Seeds.
Along with being the most friendly seed company around, these guys make wicked
strains like this one, which is a pretty extensive combination of San Diego Purple
Trainwreck, Purple Urkel, Mendocino Purps, Killer Queen and Purple Rhino. The
breeders weren’t quite happy with the original plant, though it was great in its own
right, so this is the updated version of the first Purple Fuck.
The most prized parent strain of Purple Fuck V2 was San Diego Purple Trainwreck,
which may or may not still be in existence on its own. Its best traits, though, were pre¬
served in this hybrid, and the plant has been stabilized to express a minimum number
of phenotypes. You might never see a more purple plant
Riot Seeds, USA

than this one - even the seeds have stripes of purple in

Indica-Dominant

them! Though Purple Fuck V2 can be grown indoors or

Genetics: San Diego

out, the dense, compact structure makes it perfect for a

Purple Trainwreck x Purple

medical user’s indoor grow room or any type of restricted

Urkel x Purple Fuck VI

space grow area. The breeder recommends leaving this

(Mendocino Purps x Killer

plant until 8 weeks of flowering have passed, although

Queen x Purple Rhino)

he did note that a lot of people chop it down at 7 weeks

Potency: THC 22%

and find that this works perfectly for them. Personally, I

riotseeds.nl

prefer the deeper purple color and more intense stone
that comes with leaving this strain until a full 8 weeks

have gone by, and a good curing process helps to bring out the great purple taste, too.
This strain was created with the intention of bringing forth the antidepressant qual¬
ities that the breeder needed most, so those suffering from depression might also find
Purple Fuck V2 a great choice for them. Medical users also looking for relief from
pain, nausea, Crohn’s Disease, IBS or trouble sleeping might also find this strain ben¬
eficial to them, whereas recreational users will enjoy the heavy body stone that is
lightened slightly by a high that plays around the head a little. It should be noted that
this is a very potent strain, and not one that should be smoked by rookie tokers around
the back of the college building before going to a party. More experienced smokers
and those looking for medicinal benefits will enjoy this strain the most.
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
128

jJ&3aE
-m

Purple Kush x
Blue Apollo
The USA’s 420Clones are always good for a great strain or two, especially when it
comes to providing medical strains that hit the patient’s needs. This cross between a
Purple version of everyone’s favorite, Kush, and a Blue Apollo from Joey Weed is
quite like DJ Short’s infamous Blueberry, but with more Apollo traits and a subtly dif¬
ferent effect.
Sitting at a medium height, these plants exhibit low branching with good internodal
spacing and a beautiful uniformity in the crop. It’s one of those strains that you can’t
help taking photos of, especially when flowering finishes and the buds look like purple
candy covered in trichomes!
The flavor of this strain is pure Blue Apollo, with almost none of that Kushy dankness
lingering around. The high is as clean as the smoke; as
420Clones.com, USA

transparent as a glass window and therefore great for day-

Indica-Dominant

time smoking; they might not even know you’re high! High

Genetics: Purple Kush x

you will be, though, with not a care in the world, as this

Blue Apollo

strain banishes anxiety and leaves you walking on air.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
130

Purple Ryder
Canada’s the Joint Doctor has an influence over the cannabis community that con¬
tinues to spread without him even trying. I bet marketing companies the world over
look at the popularity of his Lowryder strain and the myriad strains that have been
bred from it, and weep with frustration that they can’t come up with a marketing cam¬
paign that matches its amazing brand growth potential. Of course, Lowryder’s un¬
erring popularity is due to the fact that it literally changed the world of cannabis
growing, making it much easier for everyone from hobby growers and medical pa¬
tients to the best commercial cultivators to grow amazing pot. Without the need for
a change of the light cycle, Lowryder transitions into the flowering stage when it’s
good and ready; a trait known as “auto-flowering.” All strains bred from Lowryder
also exhibit this trait, meaning that it’s big business to breed with Lowryder these
days. However, no one does it better than the man himself, and this cross between
Lowryder and Mazar is testament to that.
iThe result of several generations of a selected hy¬
High Bred Seeds by The

brid, the very stabilized Purple Ryder will be a favorite

Joint Doctor, Canada

amongst closet growers especially, as it stays tiny and

Auto-Flowering Indica-

compact while still yielding a lot of bud. It’s almost im¬

Dominant

possible to make this bad boy stretch beyond a couple

Genetics: Lowryder x

of inches, but just to be sure, keep the lights close to the

Mazar

plants but not close enough to burn the leaves. It’s pretty

Potency: THC 12%

important to do a good flush on this strain if you’ve used

jointdoctordirect.com

any sort of synthetic nutrients on it, as the flavor of the
smoke will be lessened by the nutes and you definitely

do not want that to happen here. Even the leaves of Purple Ryder will display a gor¬
geous range of colors, but this is nothing compared to how your finished buds will
look. Weed has never had such bag appeal; if the beautiful Zooey Deschanel was a
pot plant, she’d look like this.

PHOTO BY DAVID STRANGE

It seems strange to describe a flavor as “purple-y,” but that’s the only way I can
describe what Purple Ryder tastes like: purple-y. You know, the way the purple can¬
dies taste when you’ve shoved about 8 of them in your mouth? It tastes that way and if you smoke enough of it, it will also make you drool as much as a mouth full of
candies will. The good news is that you’ll get a fairly mild relaxing body stone if you
don’t overindulge quite that much, although I know that you probably will...and I don’t
blame you at all.
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
132

i SflR

Querkle
If you’ve ever had the pleasure of meeting the effortlessly hip Subcool, you II know
that not only is his nickname dead on, he’s also one of the nicest guys in the breeding
business. Along with his Team of Green Avengers, Subcool has become well known
for creating very interesting strains from some killer breeding stock. Querkie is a cross
between Space Queen and Urkle that’s inherited some of the cool of its breeder, mak¬
ing it well worth some attention!
Querkle expresses 2 main phenotypes; one short and grape-like, the other taller
and more sativa-influenced. Both these phenos grow faster than the Urkle parent and
grow well unstopped in an indoor grow. A ScrOG set up can be a great choice for this
strain, but in any set up it will be finished in 8 weeks, with the dense buds sitting heavy
on the branches, begging to be harvested!
The smell of Querkle is very grape-like, with hints of other fruit that come through
in the smoke as well. The high is very indica, with a fogginess in the head and a heaviness in the body, making it a great all day toke for the
Subcool and Team

serious stoners and a nice night time treat for the more

Green Avengers, USA

rookie types! Try smoking this out of a clean glass bong

Indica-Dominant

for one of the fruitiest tokes you II ever enjoy, then sit

Genetics: Urkle x Space

back and enjoy that body buzz we all love!

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
134

Rock Star
It probably says a lot about me that when I think “rock star” I don t think of Jon Bon
Jovi or Bruce Springsteen, but I immediately think of Steven Tyler from Aerosmith. I
mean, come on; the dude has lips that most female American TV anchors would give
their right breast implant for, he had an incredibly attractive daughter with Bebe Buell,
and he had been around the rehab block 5 or 6 times before I had even been born and yet he’s still going. Sure, he’s on American Idol, but I like to overlook that - to
me, he’s still the Steven Tyler that oozes cool and is totally badass, much like this
strain from Holland’s Bonguru Seeds. With a Sensi Star parent, this strain already
had ‘star’ genetics right from the offset, and with a Rockbud mother, it couldn’t exactly
have been a jazz singer. Thankfully for us these two plants came together to create
the ultimate Rock Star; a chill, fun plant that gets you mad high!
Like the careers of rock stars the world over, this plant can be a bit of an effort
to get started. You don’t need to send endless demos out to faceless record com¬
panies who are more likely to pour money into the new
Bonguru Seeds, Holland

Lady Beydonna pile of crap than give you a chance,

Indica-Dominant

but you do need to pop your beans into some clean

Genetics: Sensi Star x

water overnight and then plant them straight into small

Rockbud

pots, about 5mm down, and water very gently. From

Potency: THC 19-20%

these humble beginnings, big things will start; soon

bonguruseeds.com

your seedling will be bursting out and will quickly be¬
come a medium tall plant. You should vegetative Rock

Star until you can see 7 internodes, then flip it into flowering. When it’s in its final
stage, this plant will start behaving just like Mr. Tyler himself; it will bloom explo¬
sively, have no time for pests and become super dense (sorry, Steven!), it will also
be in possession of felony-charge levels of resin - just as Steven was when my
friend met him around the back of a TV studio in London, tokin’ up just before an in¬
terview. 70 days after forced flowering you’ll be ready to harvest, and manicuring
will be a dream! Expect a heavy yield!
They couldn’t call this strain Rock Star if it wasn’t a crazy high, and this is certainly
a stone that won’t weigh you down. In fact, quite the opposite; before you know it
you’ll be tying scarves to your belt, taking your shirt off and running around your room
like a madman screaming along to Dude Looks Like A Lady. Don’t worry, we’ve all
been there, and this is a perfectly normal reaction to the Steven Tyler of pot strains.
Just don’t end up judging on American fucking Idol.
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
136

Rocklock
After talking to anyone in the Netherlands, you wouldn’t think that Holland’s DNA Ge¬
netics have been around for less than a decade. Everyone has some serious respect
for this crew and the strains that they create, as do I, and those Dutch really know
their pot so that’s some real kudos right there! Indica lovers, however, will have even
more reason to love them after they’ve grown and smoked Rocklock, which counts
Warlock from Magus Genetics and Rock Star from Bonguru Beans as its parents.
With such heavy indica hitters as Mom and Pop, it’s in¬
evitable that Rocklock displays all the best traits of that
species, bringing much delight to everyone who loves a
good couch lock!
As with all good indicas, Rocklock doesn’t grow too
large at all, making it a fantastic choice for an indoor
plant or for an outdoor stealth grow, as it can easily be
hidden behind other plants, keeping it away from the
DNA Genetics, Holland

eyes of thieves or other “nuisances” (if you know what I

Indica-Dominant

mean). It also stays short in terms of flowering time, fin¬

Genetics: Warlock x

ishing fully in just 8 short weeks, which is a small amount

Rock Star

of time even for an indica-dominant strain. The breeders

Potency: THC 18-21%

recommend Rocklock for high-density planting, so use

dnagenetics.com

it to make the best out of whatever limited grow space
you have; growing shouldn’t be limited to those with

huge warehouses just begging to be filled with pot, after all! An average yield can be
anywhere from 500 to 600 grams per square yard of grow space, meaning that even
a spare bedroom can produce enough stellar weed to keep you high for months! The
finished buds will be particularly resinous and therefore great for hash-making, al¬
though if you do go the hash route be careful - this really is a heavy hitter and even
more so when you smoke the hash!
Rocklock is the perfect name for this strain, not just because it brings together
both of the parent strains but because it describes almost perfectly what you’ll be feel¬
ing after a full joint of it - kind of like stoner onomatopoeia, if you will. The heavy
smoke will wind its way inside and through your body, making you feel heavier and
heavier until you feel that you’re made of stone, and it will make your muscles so wiggly that they’ve got no chance of lifting your rock-solid body from its place on your
comfy couch - not that you would want them to!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
138

Royal Purple Kush
'gggggggg^gttUKtlSISBBSKBKBtKtSSBKttBBStlKKKBMKKKtBtKtKSSKKttUBKKBKStttUUtUKtK^

'

"

There are so many Kush strains around these days that it’s hard to keep up. Everyone
has their favorite, but I defy any real indica lover not to feel that little tingle of antici¬
pation when they hear the name of a variety they’ve not tried; I certainly feel that,
even now! However, it was so much more than a tingle that I felt when I heard that
America’s fantastic Emerald Triangle Seeds had a Royal Purple Kush variety. This
company should be a favorite of old-school tokers; they specialize in revamping
strains from years ago, so I knew that this plant was going to be a special one. The
breeders have crossed a Black Afghani with a Bubba Kush to bring the Kush line back
to its roots and enhance all that we love about it that little bit more. Good on you,
Emerald Triangle!
The vigorous growth of Royal Purple Kush might panic indoor growers at first, as
it will seem as if the plant will grow and grow until the top of it breaks through the roof
of your grow room. However, you shouldn’t worry; this strain only stretches about 20%
after you flip it into flower, so you can actually vegetate
Emerald Triangle Seeds,

it for much longer than you can most plants. This growth

USA

will, however, give the plants a fantastic structure, and

Indica-Dominant

one that’s more than ready to burst forth with heavy flo¬

Genetics: Black Afghani x

ral growth in its final stage of life. If purple buds are your

Bubba Kush

thing, or you’re looking to add great bag appeal to your

Potency: THC 20%

final product, the breeders recommend dropping the

emeraldtriangleseeds.co.uk

temperatures in your grow room in the final few weeks,
or even (and this is a great little trick) feeding cold water

to your plants, making sure that you drop the temperature gradually as to not freak
out your whole crop. Outdoor growers in colder climates will enjoy this purple coloring
naturally, and should look to harvest around the beginning of October. The flowering
time of this strain sits at 9 weeks, and it’s a medium-high yielder so be prepared for
a busy harvest!
Royal Purple Kush improves upon the already fantastic Kush taste by making it
even sweeter, and bringing in the fruity flavor of the Bubba Kush father plant. As if
this wasn’t enough, that delicious smoke melts into a high that is balanced between
both mind and body. Whilst the serenity of a body stone makes its way through your
limbs, you’ll open your eyes into a very energetic head high that makes you deter¬
mined, inspired and feeling more than all right. This is a classic contemporary Kush
strain for indica lovers everywhere!

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
140

Shishkaberry
America’s Poor White Farmer Seeds is a lucky man; he has some fantastic contacts
in the breeding world, including the kind folks from Eugene, Oregon who gifted him
the Shishkaberry seeds that he grew out into this fabulous plant. It was originally cre¬
ated from two Afghani hybrid parents, and shows this indica expression in the way it
grows as well as the way it smokes, making it great for medical patients and recre¬
ational smokers alike.
Shishkaberry plants have a very low rate of branching but tend to form giant colas
that make your grow room look amazing. As the plants get further into the flowering
stage the buds will soon turn deep purple and stay that way, giving your finished buds
so much bag appeal that modeling agencies will be sniffing around your grow room
looking for the talent. You won’t have to wait long until you can take the nugs from
the plants and set about drying them, but be sure to let them cure for a while to bring
out the best of the delicious flavor and aroma.
It’s impossible to mistake the strong blueberry flavor
Poor White Farmer

in these buds even when they’re still packed inside a

Seeds, USA

baggy. The smoke is like an explosion of fruit in your

Indica-Dominant

mouth, which will linger even while the relaxing, pain-

Potency: THC 16.1%

controlling narcotic stone sets in - bliss!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
142

*

^ wf

Siberian Queen
Ganjah Seeds are a great young company operating out of one of my favorite spots
in Spain, San Sebastian. Their Siberian Queen strain is a mix of Skunk and Afghani,
and, if she’s anything like my friend Afo from Siberia, loves Russian Standard vodka
and gives amazing head rubs.
Although you’d assume that, being Siberian, this plant would prefer the bracing
cold climate of an outdoor grow in the north, in reality she can be grown indoors as
well as out and prefers humid climates. She is pretty strong though, even in the chilly
outdoors, and is particularly resistant to disease; it must be all the vodka killing the
germs. Indoors, she’ll be fully finished in 60 days, whereas outdoors she’ll be ready
for harvest in the middle of October. Your 2-foot-high plants will be medium to good
producers, and will give you deliciously resinous buds that are sparkly enough to hang
on a necklace and call jewelry — although that would be a waste of damn good nugs!
The Skunk mother’s taste really comes through in the smoke of Siberian Queen,
—___—

..

and the balance of indica and sativa makes the high

Ganjah Seeds, Spain

equally balanced; both your body and mind will be full

Indica-Dominant

of that enjoyable tingly buzz while your brain runs riot

Genetics: Skunk x

and your body just switches the TV channel over from

Afghani

time to time.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
144

SkaSkunk
Spain’s Dr. Canem and Company are a great company and are hands down some of
the coolest guys in the breeding world. Every time they bring out a new strain I’m like
a kid in a candy store, wanting one of everything and eventually getting so excited
that I puke up a little and have to sit down. Their SkaSkunk is a cross between a beau¬
tiful Tormento Roja plant and every-popular Skunk #1, and is a nice fuel-smelling plant
with a lot of energy!
This plant will grow to a medium height, and might take a little more growing expertise
than newbie cultivators possess. However, seasoned growers will have a riot with it, and
the gorgeous look of your grow room right before harvest will make the extra effort more
than worthwhile. Your favourite nutes will help to plump up the already impressive har¬
vest, but be sure to flush extra carefully to keep that strangely addictive gas flavor strong.
The Skunk #1 parentage doesn’t hide away when you smell these nugs, but the
high is a nice balance of a Skunk high and a Tormento Roja effect, making it perfect
for almost any time or day. The best way to enjoy this
Dr. Canem and

strain is to put on some slightly-too-short black pants, pull

Company, Spain

your white socks up over your ankles, put on Time Bomb

Indica-Dominant

by Rancid and dance until your legs no longer have any

Genetics: Tormento

feeling and you fall straight asleep on your face.

Roja x Skunk #1
Potency: THC 17-19%
facebook.com/drcanem

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
146

&$fczL. ■ ■
^vtSw,
fZggSSSkii*-■aXsMaBMte&LJ- "■■ ijwKJuM
VS$&KWnft£sZAi, <*: ****$Wmi

Skunk NL
Skunk AND Northern Lights? Hell yes! I know you’re already sold on this strain with¬
out me saying a word, but bear with me here as I am pretty anal about my books
and would hate to see the rest of this page totally blank. Canada’s Finest Medicinal
Seeds is run by the fine team who put out Treating Yourself, the medical marijuana
journal that is a must-read for all involved with Canada’s medical scene as well as
those just looking to get some knowledge into them! As such, you would expect their
original strains to be focused on giving medical patients exactly what they need, and
you would be right. As a cross between Skunk #1 and Northern Lights #5, it com¬
prises two strains that have more than proved themselves over the last couple of
decades, and, like Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt’s kids when they grow up, cannot fail
to be amazing.
Even though parent strain Northern Lights #5 is known to be a strain that newbie
growers sometimes struggle with, Skunk NL is a fantastic choice for beginner growers
and medical users who are growing for their own con¬
Finest Medicinal Seeds,

sumption. With a flowering time of 8 weeks and a struc¬

Canada

ture that doesn’t get too leggy or too tall, it’s a fairy easy

Indica-Dominant

ride right through, and it’s also a fairly good yielder; out¬

Genetics: Skunk #1 x

door growers can expect to get up to 680 grams per

Northern Lights #5

plant outdoors. All growers should be aware that, due to

Potency: THC 16%

the Skunk #1 influence, this strain is going to stink to

finestmedicinalseeds.com

high heaven in the later stages of flowering and there’s
little you can do to stop it. Good ventilation will be key in

making sure that the whole rest of your zip code doesn’t know what you’re doing, and
charcoal filters will be an absolute must. Outdoor growers would be advised to plant
their guerilla grows far from the prying noses of others, or near a candy floss factory
/ water filtration plant or some other equally stinky place, so that smell will overpower
the smell of the pot!
After you’ve managed to get through the jungle of your grow room and hack down
the huge, fairly loose buds at the end of the 8-week period, you will want to give them
a good curing period to really get the best taste possible. Your first smoke will make
all that effort worthwhile; the smell of freshly made applesauce and ripened fruit gives
way to a clean smoke, which in turn slides into a great body stone that also plays
around the brain, too. This is a fantastic strain to combat high blood pressure, anxiety,
stress and body tension.
Cannabis Sndica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2

lijLjjjw

mm

Skunkberry
It might sound like a gross name for the little nuggets of poo that those stinkiest of
mammals leave behind, but Skunkberry is in fact a strain comprising Pure Skunk and
Blueberry FI genetics to create a Skunk plant that’s even tastier than normal. The
breeders at Peak Seeds in Canada are known for creating interesting crosses that
catch the eye of the community in Canada, and I’ve a funny feeling that this strain will
do exactly that. Even the breeders consider it to be their best plant, which, when you
consider the great strains they have in their catalog, is saying a lot!
If you’re a beginner grower looking to break into some of the more classic strains
without the extra fuss, then Skunkberry might be for you. It’s a very easy one to cul¬
tivate, with a high tolerance to fertilizers as well as a resistance to any rookie errors
you might make. The plants grow large, juicy colas even though they are only a
medium height themselves, and they finish in a short 8 to 9 weeks. The harvests from
Skunkberry are massive for such a small plant, making them also great for a commbmhhbhhmmmm
Peak Seeds, Canada

mercial grower.
You’ll recognize that familiar Skunk smell, but with a

Indica-Dominant

good dose of fruitiness in there, too. This is a very fun

Genetics: Pure Skunk x

high that’s as mental as it is physical and will leave you

Blueberry FI

ready to party the night away!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
150

Hk *

Slyder
Sagarmatha Seeds are one of the pillars of the Dutch breeding industry. After almost
twenty years in the game they’ve got a solid reputation that’s well deserved, and their
original strains have spawned so many imitators and offspring that I wouldn’t even be
able to count them all. I’ve always enjoyed their strains that embrace landrace genetics
the most, like this one. Slyder is a cross between Northern Lights and an Afghani lan¬
drace strain, and was created to harness everything good about the Afghani while tam¬
ing it so it could be grown indoors. As such, Slyder is a fantastic indica-dominant with
a little bit of a wild side!
Indoor growers might feel like Slyder is a gift from the cannabis gods, as it is almost
tailor-made for indoor grow rooms and smaller spaces. As well as having a tight, short
structure, this plant doesn’t smell very much even just before harvest, but it does yield
like a plant that’s three times its size. Its average height is between 3 and 4 feet, although
it can grow a little taller out in the open air, and these plants are so bushy that they almost
■

look like giant fluffy green pinecones. Though this strain

Sagarmatha Seeds

will happily grow using almost any technique, the breeders

Holland

recommend clipping the center cola to ensure that the

Indica-Dominant

growth ends up yielding the maximum amount when har¬

Genetics: Afghani

vest rolls around. The vegetative period should go on until

Landrace x Northern Lights

you can see between 4 and 7 internodes, and then the

Potency: THC 17-19%

plant should be flipped into flowering. This period will last

highestseeds.com

between 55 and 60 days before being properly finished,

sagarmatha.nl

and you’ll notice that even into the later stages, you can
barely even smell the vast bouquet of dank that resides in

your grow room. Once chopped and cured, however, it’s a different story altogether; your
buds will smell as good as a steak on a BBQ and be even harder to resist! Indoor growers
will be stoked to find that after harvest, their yields weigh in at around 300 grams per
square yard of grow room; a fantastic result for a plant that is less hassle than a polite
great aunt sitting in the corner watching reruns of “Diagnosis Murder.”
Your finished and newly stinky Slyder buds will give off a fairly thick smoke that
turns into a very thick stone when it hits your lungs; the strain is named after the Ican’t-get-my-feet-off-the-floor gait that smokers walk with after partaking. At even
higher doses, this strain will turn even constant tokers into little kittens; or, rather, into
polite great aunts sitting in the corner watching reruns of “Diagnosis Murder.” Sounds
like a great evening to me!
Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
152

Smile
The UK’s Underground Originals crew are masters of marketing. Think of your quin¬
tessential stoner - go on, imagine him in your head. What is he doing? He’s smiling,
possibly with droopy eyes. So what does the name of this strain say to me? It says that
it’s the ultimate cannabis strain; one that will turn you into the stoner you’ve always
wanted to be, all droopy eyes, confused look but most of all, a Smile. Good work guys.
This indica-dominant plant is as much fun to grow as it is to smoke, and will
plaster a grin on your face when you’re doing either.
This stain stretches very slowly for about 6 weeks after
flowering, so you should force flowering when your
plants are around half the size that you want them to
grow to.
Though Smile grows like an indica, the high is very
sativa-influenced and can even be psychoactive if har¬
vested at the right time. There isn’t a hint of couchlock,
Underground Originals,

just a bit of a body buzz, but most of the action goes

UK

on above your neck, from the fuzzy brain feelings to a

Indica-Dominant

grin that wouldn’t look out of place on Jack Nicholson’s

Potency: THC 18-20%

Joker himself.

ugorg.com

Cannabis indica The Essentia! Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
154

II
aifgSs

mm

■

...

9h&. r

V^.;>

• "•

: JR f I

iiP , *. ^jJIR,i

hss-,/ \

"3J£,<-J&&/

***,■■ |,:-Y*f

^

..*5^ **

W** "Mg

Hffe iiSMm
&L # F

Xm

’• i j, ^V5!

iHJi

-v-

KS '/vT^

£1117
PillW :

fPr

-s

V
i

Snow White
Holland’s Spliff Seeds have absolutely made my day with this strain. I’m not only
stoked that it’s named after one of my favorite childhood movies (although the real
favorite was Flight Of The Navigator), but they’ve actually done a little of Disney backstory with this one. The fantastic Spliff Seeds breeders have bred this plant from 3
distinct varieties: Northern Lights, White Widow, and, you’ve guessed it, Cinderella
99. Of course, Cinderella didn’t come out until 17 years after Snow White and the
Seven Dwarfs, but let’s leave my Disney nerdism aside and just say that this is a
wicked hybrid that’s super strong!
Indoor growers should make sure that their light distribution is even, otherwise they
might end up with one giant plant right under the center of the light and 7 dwarves
around the edge. To remedy this situation, move your larger plants to the edge of the
lights in the vegetative stage and let the smaller ones catch up! As an 80% indica strain
this is never going to get too tall, but it does grow quickly in the vegetative phase. Snow
White is comfortable being both indoors and outdoors,
Spliff Seeds, Holland

but to make her really Happy grow her in a hydro SOG

Indica-Dominant

system and don’t let her linger too long in the vegetative

Genetics: Northern

stage, or she’ll get a little Sleepy - 3 weeks is usually

Lights x White Widow x

good. Unfortunately, if she’s riddled with disease she

Cinderella 99

won’t alert you by being Sneezy, so you’ll have to keep

Potency: THC 20-22%

an eye out for mold and powdery mildew instead. Hope¬

spliffseeds.nl

fully you won’t need to call the Doc. Overwatering will
make her pretty Grumpy, so try to avoid that, and feeding

her too many nutes will make her limp and Dopey. Towards the end of the flowering
stage Snow White will be loaded, and I do mean absolutely loaded, with dense, sticky
buds that will turn her from an attractive plant into an absolute beauty queen. She might
seem Bashful, but she actually loves the attention. The thick white hairs will cover the
buds, making them appear even frostier than they already are; you might say they have
buds as white as snow. The finished buds will be unbelievably resinous and sticky, and
your final harvest should be massive, whether you’re growing indoors or out!
Snow White buds smell absolutely glorious; fruity, sweet, and just like candyfloss.
To preserve the sweet taste I like to smoke out of a nice clean bong, although that
method makes this strain hit even harder. It’s already a strain that will make you
Sleepy, Happy and Dopey all at the same time, but a hu9e bong hit can also make
you Coughy, Stoney and Is-he-passed-outy too!
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
156

Special Kannabia
Kannabia are one of my absolute favorite Spanish seed companies, and not just be¬
cause they’re heaps of fun or because one of the breeders has the same name as
the best character from Spanish kid’s TV show Pocoyo. No, I like Kannabia because
they are incredibly good at what they do — and what they do is growing great mari¬
juana. They have outdone themselves this time with this fantastic strain, which was
created by breeding an Early Pearl x Skunk cross with an Afghani indica plant.
Despite its indica dominance, Special Kannabia plants tend to stretch a little more
than normal and have larger intermodal spacing than you might be used to. The indica
genetics are also less strong than other hybrids, meaning that these plants can take
up to 3 months to be finished outdoors. It is resistant to extremes of temperature,
however, and the Skunk phenotype is extremely bushy and delightful! These plants
will get to 3 or 4 feet and yield 20 grams each indoors and 60 grams each outdoors.
Harvest should be at around 8 to 9 weeks for optimal results!
These very heavy, hard nugs will show you why this
Kannabia Breeding

strain is called “Special”; the balanced high is beautifully

Team, Spain

light but equally as effective, and the taste is just sub¬

Indica-Dominant

lime. This Kannabia treat is certainly a Special strain

Genetics: (Early Pearl x

that’s more than worth a try!

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
158

>■
*
:kl / Jt*

",'
( hbr
, >
» It
is#*'' Mi4 1 J
1

Spiritual Punk
I think Spain’s fantastic Samsara Seeds created this strain just for me. I may not
have a mohawk or huge safety pins through my appendages anymore, but I still do
listen to Crass and my John Cooper Clarke books are very well read. I always give
the finger to the cops when driving by them in my friend’s Prius and I do quite like
that vegan restaurant round the corner from my house.... Am I a Spiritual Punk? I
think so.
Across between a real Mazar-I-Shariff plant and the ever-fantastic Northern Lights,
the actual Spiritual Punk is very popular in Cali’s medical clubs, which is a nice nod
to the punk venue on Gilman Street - where I imagine it’s very popular, too! As a
100% indica this plant is squat and bushy, with high resistance to disease and in¬
tensely dense buds. After a flowering time of 53 days, both indoor and outdoor grow¬
ers can expect to harvest just under 500 grams per square yard of grow space.
The startling amount of resin on Spiritual Punk buds means that this strain is great
for finger hash, which feels grassroots enough to be
Samsara Seeds, Spain

properly punk. The high will make you forget all your

Indica-Dominant

worries though, so to regain that real punk anger watch

Genetics: Northern

a few episodes of “My Super Sweet Sixteen” and feel

Lights x Mazar

nihilistic all over again!

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
160

* A ** ** :

■K

jl

;y,$®

StarBerry
Holland’s HortiLab Seed Company are very well known in their part of the world, not
least because they make some absolutely fantastic Sour strains and are known for
working with great genetics. This strain is a bit of a departure from the lines that they’re
most well known for, but it is certainly not a departure from the quality they always
push forward. This strain is a cross between HortiLab’s own StarBud female clone
and a Blueberry male from DJ Short - definitely a star strain!
If you’ve ever grown DJ Short’s famous Blueberry, then you’ll find this strain a total
doddle to cultivate. It’s a small plant, as you would expect, although if you fail to keep
your lights near the seedlings right from the moment they pop, you can experience a
little more stretch than you will really want. To keep your lights at the correct distance,
put your hand over the tips of the plants. If the light burns your hand, they are too close.
Find the point where they just stop being too hot, and that is the perfect position for
them. In the vegetative stage, this plant will exhibit some good branching and when
flowering begins, the bushy structure will fill out into an
HortiLab Seed Company,

almost fluffy little plant, one that grows incredibly dense

Holland

little nugs that are so hard they feel like big marbles. Be¬

Indica-Dominant

cause of this, this plant can be susceptible to mold in

Genetics: StarBud x

more humid environments, so outdoor growers in warm,

Blueberry

wet countries should always check their plants thor¬

Potency: THC 19%

oughly, and indoor growers should ensure that good ven¬

hortilab.nl

tilation is at the top of their to-do list. StarBerry can be
grown in a hydro set up with great results, but will also

be fairly happy in a soil grow with minimal nutrients. Be sure not to overwater, but in¬
stead keep a sharp eye on your babies and make sure they’re getting just enough
food. The flavor of the Blueberry father will come through in these perfect little buds,
highlighted with purple and orange, so you’ll want to do a very extensive flush for the
2 weeks before harvest to ensure you’re getting the very best taste and aroma in your
final product. StarBerry is a medium to high yielder, depending on the amount of light
she gets, but indoor growers can expect a harvest that they’ll be more than happy with!
As a heavy indica-dominant cross, StarBerry delivers a pretty strong body stone
but it also has a nice little tickle of a head high that wili keep you awake long enough
to enjoy the effects! The long-lasting stone will have you sitting and “relaxing” for hours
on end, debating everything from the meaning of life to whether Machete was as good
as Planet Terror. And just FYI: it was better.
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
162

Sugar Loaf
Cannabis strains often have me feeling hungry and heading straight for the kitchen,
but usually this is after I’ve smoked about 8 bowls and the munchies have got me
firmly in their grasp. However, this hybrid strain from Spain’s CannaBioGen had me
feeling hungry before I’d ever picked up my pipe, and I wanted banana bread quite
specifically; it was the most sugary loaf I could think of! The name, however, refers
to the way that sugar used to be bought, back in Victorian times. Rather than the
bags of the stuff that we load up on now, white sugar
used to come pressed very heavily into cone shapes,
and if you wanted to use any, you had to use special¬
ized ‘sugar nips’ to hack off a bit and plop it into your
tea. Once you’ve grown this plant, you can see why
CannaBioGen thought the name was relevant; not only
do these plants grow in that same conical shape, but
they’re also so covered in white crystals that you’d think
CannaBioGen, Spain

Indica-Dominant

they were made of sugar!
Sugar Loaf is a cross between a Pakistani indica

Genetics: Pakistani x

plant and a hybrid of Indian Manali and Colombian ge¬

(Indian Manali x

netics known as Capricho, so as you can imagine it is

Colombian)

quite the exotic beauty when it grows! This strain is one

cannabiogen.com

that can be grown both indoors and out, and will grow
with a fabulous vigor in either situation. Staking can be

very helpful when growing Sugar Loaf, and the easiest way to do this is to stake early
on and allow the plants to grow around them. In the later stages of flowering, the
branches will also need to be tied to avoid them breaking. The vegetative period
should be around 25 days, after which you should flip your plants into forced flowering
for best results. The flowering period is around 60 days, which translates to a harvest
around the beginning of October for outdoor growers. By this point, the sugary look
of Sugar Loaf will be complete and you’ll have to hold yourself back from licking the
colas like a lollipop. I’ve tried it, and it’s not a good idea.
The high calyx-to-leaf ratio of this plant makes trimming a doddle, and the good
news is that the dried buds look just as amazing as they do on the plant. The smoke
is as sweet as a chocolate drop and just as delightful, but it’s the high that’s the real
cherry on top: a psychoactive high with just enough of a body stone to keep you from
flying right out of your living room, down the street and far, far away!

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
164

ill ■

safest

\

p|©1
;=•' 9
f^RF
«. _

;:

.: ;!

||is
f ^Vi*?
SplI

The Beast
I don’t know whether there’s some sort of worldwise Disney resurgence going on
these days, or whether the company just etched its movies into my subconscious¬
ness so strongly when I was an infant that I see references in almost all places at all
times, but there are a hell of a lot of strains lately that seem to me to have taken their
titles from Mr. Walt’s movies. What with Snow White also in this very book and this,
a clear play on the story of Belle and her dopey father, I feel like I might as well call
this book the World’s Essential Guide to Cannabis Strains Named After Movies Made
By A Potentially Anti-Semitic Animator. I won’t though. The similarities between this
strain and the prince-turned-beast can’t be ignored, though; no one knows its par¬
ents, it’s ridiculously strong, and when it’s fully matured its almost totally covered in
orange-brown hairs. I wouldn’t be surprised if I found someone’s French dad cower¬
ing in a basement somewhere in the North of Seeds grow facility - although it
should be said that they’re lovely guys!
Just like Disney’s prince, when it’s time for this plant
North of Seeds, Spain

to become The Beast it will grow almost before your

Indica-Dominant

very eyes. The hybrid vigor means that it will shoot up

Potency: THC 11-17%

quickly, necessitating an almost daily raising of the

northofseeds.com

lights in your grow room if you don’t want the plants to
burn their tips. The structure grows strong enough to

withstand a hurricane, with extremely strong stems and thick, deep green leaves that
are almost as wide as they are long. It does, however, have one Achilles heel; ex¬
treme humidity, both indoors and out, can foster the growth of mold and bud rot, so
be sure to keep ventilation up, humidity down, and check often for mold on the tight
little nugs. It takes 60 days for this strain to fully mature, which, if you’re growing out¬
doors, translates to a harvest date of October 10th or just before. Indoor growers
will harvest something in the region of 350 to 500 grams per square meter or grow
space, while those lucky enough to grow this strain outdoors can expect to yield
that amount from one single plant.
When you smoke up some buds of the Beast, you’ll feel like you, too, are breaking
out of your human shell and turning into a greater animal. Once the floral taste and
smoke clears away, your skin will tingle, your muscles will tighten and you might even
see your clothes begin to tear at the seams. Don’t worry though, you’ll chill out before
you start to roar and instead, this heavy stone will turn you into a happy little puppy
rolling over on its back to get a nice little belly rub.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
166

tft.cfA

The Hog
Holland’s TH Seeds do great work with some wicked genetics, creating strains that
even the most cynical of growers love to grow and the most hardened of tokers love
to smoke. The Hog is a Hindu Kush x Afghani strain originally from Tennessee, which
makes a nice change, that was taken over to Southern California about a decade ago
and has been bred out by TH Seeds since then. It’s a phenotype of Hogsbreath, which
serious smokers love for its high and lingering effect.
This is a TH Seeds’ quintessential indica strain, growing never higher than 3.5 feet
tall and giving a great yield of around 450 grams per square meter of grow space. A
SOG set up will give you the maximum possible yield from The Hog, especially when
clones are flowered at around 4 inches and the density of the plants is around 4 per
square foot. This is an easy strain to grow, though you need to keep humidity levels
at around 45% at all times and keep an eye out for bud rot.
I think the Hog is so called because it is super stinky, so if you love funky-smelling
strains and you’re a Cheese fiend, you’ll go mad over
TH Seeds, Holland

this one. However, it also hits as strongly as it reeks, and

Indica-Dominant

gives an extremely heavy, lethargic, narcotic couch-

Genetics: Hindu Kush x

locker stone that hardcore tokers love but that might

Afghani

wipe rookie smokers right out!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
168

I

!

*
>%-. V»-

.

'

r

The Purps
Canada’s BC Bud Depot have got their hands on a real winner, here. The Purps is a
strain of legend. A fantastic, stable, inbred line of the killer Mendo Purps that the
breeders got as a gift at the 2004 Cannabis Cup. Having worked on this for two
straight years before releasing it, BC Bud Depot now consider it to be one of their
best strains; and given the quality of their catalogue, that’s saying a lot.
If you veg the Purps for just 4 weeks, you can expect your plant to stay under 3
feet but branch out like Starbucks: somewhat excessively. This is a hardy plant that
can adapt to almost any grow situation, but as The Purps has such a phenomenal
flavor, an organic soil grow is probably the best way to go. Outdoor growers can ex¬
pect to harvest in the middle of October.
The buds smell both Skunky and grape-like, and they look sexier than Sophia
Loren smoking a blunt and pouring a beer. Harvesting your crop before the stated 7-8
week flowering time will ensure a slightly more heady high, though you can’t really
escape the couchlock that The Purps is going to bring.
BC Bud Depot, Canada

You can, though, keep this to a minimum and get your-

Indica-Dominant

self an intense heady high thats clear as a freshly

Genetics: Mendo Purps

cleaned window and as enjoyable as a night with the

IBL

aforementioned Ms. Loren.

Potency: THC 20%
bcbuddepot.com

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
170

Thunderbud
I think if I was to go into professional wrestling, I would name myself after this strain.
Thunderbud’s gimmick would be to lift his legs like a sumo wrestler and bring them
down to huge claps of thunder from the sound system. Thunderbud would also cele¬
brate his many wins by getting mad high on Holy Smoke Seeds’ Purple Urkel x
Pineapple Funk cross whilst sitting on his opponent. I’m not sure if the WWE would
really like it but I’d be every stoner’s favorite wrestler!
In order to grow just like my Thunderbud namesake I’d have to get big real quick,
have huge, strong arms and finish up with this image overhaul in just 9 weeks from the
beginning. I would be quite tall but mostly wide, as Thunderbud is only slightly indicadominant, but mostly I’d be chunky and dense, like the wicked purple nugs that populate
Thunderbud plants towards the end of flowering. I’d also be pretty gorgeous to look at,
but of course I’d have to cover that with manliness; no one wants a pretty wrestler.
The best thing about being Thunderbud, however, will be the sweet, fruity smoke
that I get to enjoy when my opponent is eating the canHoly Smoke Seeds, UK

vas and I’m chillin’ with a bowl of my namesake. I’ll be

Indica-Dominant

feelin’ that nice balanced high, getting a lot of heady con-

Genetics: Purple Urkel x

fidence and, most of all, relaxing into the knowledge that

Pineapple Funk

it’s good to be Thunderbud.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
172

v*

■H

*L"

Tingo Sour Kush
I know, I know. You think you’ve seen all the Sour Kush strains; you think you’ve
smoked them all. Well, it’s a good job that the USA’s tissue culture experts BillBerry
Farms are here to offer you a new and more interesting take on the Sour line than
you’re used to! By crossing NY Sour Diesel with OG Kush and MK Ultra back in 2010,
these guys have not only brought together 3 of my all-time favorite strains, they’ve
opened up a whole new world of Sour weed.
Though this strain can be grown indoors or outdoors, the breeder recommends
that indoor growers who prefer a SOG set up should cut the center apex to encourage
the plant to bush out. The breeder also states that, when cloning, you will need to

PHOTOS BY JIN ALBRECHT AND BBF

give the babies extra attention and a lot of TLC. These plants hog the light so be sure
to prevent them from overgrowing your other strains, and if you want to keep your
plants 3 or 4 feet high instead of 9, keep the vegetative stage to a minimum.
The bright green Tingo Sour Kush nugs will taste of citrus fruit and oil, and will
bring on a creeping kidnapper of a body high. You’ll be
BillBerry Farms, USA

sitting there chatting then, out of nowhere, this huge

Indica-Dominant

body buzz will puts its hand over your mouth and drag

Genetics: MK Ultra x NY

you away for a few hours. Don’t worry; it will all be OK

Sour Diesel x OG Kush

in the end!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
174

Top 69
I’ll refrain from making the obvious jokes here. In fact, they’re all pretty obvious so III
refrain from making any jokes at all, save to say that the name of this strain definitely
made me smile. I’m used to that when dealing with plants from Spain’s Advanced
Seeds, though, as they are well known for having some fantastic breeding stock com¬
prising the best genetics you could hope to get your grubby little hands on. This strain
takes Northern Lights as its base, but as ever, Advanced Seeds aren’t happy with just
pumping out another Northern Lights cross. No, for Top 69 they’ve gone even further
and crossed that plant with a ruderalis variety to create an auto-flowering Northern
Lights hybrid. Yep, you read that right.
As the Northern Lights hybrid parent of this strain leaned more towards the indica
side, Top 69 is an indica-dominant cross and therefore is one that will be more than happy
in your indoor grow room. In 3-gallon pots, plants will grow to around 3 feet tall, while out¬
doors they can get to 4 feet and slightly beyond, though the healthy dose of ruderalis ge—__—...—■

netics will always keep them fairly squat. These plants

Advanced Seeds, Spain

exhibit extensive branching, making them more than suit¬

Indica-Dominant

able for both SOG and ScrOG grow styles - and, in fact,

Genetics: Northern

this can be a great plant to try those styles with for the first

Lights Hybrid x Ruderalis

time, as you don’t need to worry about changing the light

Potency: THC 14%

schedule and so can focus more on training the plants.

advancedseeds.com

Outdoor growers will find that this is a hardy plant, as the
ruderalis genetics were originally found in very cold, super

harsh climates. Even as their offspring, modern auto-flowering plants still preserve that
tendency towards strength and resilience, which makes outdoor ruderalis grows incredibly
hardy. The best time for growing Top 69, however, in the Northern Hemisphere, is still
between April and November, though Top 69 will survive the colder snaps that some grow¬
ers might experience towards the end of that period. Indoor production can reach up to
450 grams per square yard of grow room, while outdoors, this can be even higher. The
plant will be finished in just 90 days from seed, meaning that even with only one grow set
up, indoor growers can easily get 4 crops a year from Top 69.
The breeders recommend this strain for relaxation and meditation, although I
reckon that wanting to get a buzz on while watching reruns of “The Office” is just as
valuable an experience when smoking Top 69. Expect a very sedative type of effect,
as good for pain relief and inducing sleep as it is for bringing on the ever-famous
munchies. Mine’s a three-cheese pizza.
Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
176

mu*-

mt

Sf

IP

? i&, - rA'
?4f,
-v
V

tA;- ,*fetdP
*f» tai
sn ' - -*■ •
K

Tsi Fly
The Europe-based Mosca Seeds company hasn’t been around all that long, but
they have made enough impact on the breeding scene for you to think they’ve been
in business since before you were born. Their Tsi Fly strain is one of the best from
their collection, in my opinion, and not just because it beings together the genetic
powerhouses of C4 and C99. The C4 female was convinced to go on a blind date
with the C99 male, and as soon as these kids set eyes on each other, sparks flew;
the breeders couldn’t keep them off each other and soon a little Tsi Fly offspring
came forth. The Mosca breeders have backcrossed this little guy to stabilize it and
bring out its most desirable qualities, meaning that your crop will be as uniform as
it will be beautiful!
You can’t mistake a properly working grow room full of Tsi Fly: a glorious sea of
3 foot plants, all wide, deep green leaves and fat colas, all happily swaying gently
in the breeze of the ventilation and looking so juicy that it s hard not to chew on a
bud right there and then. Tsi Fly forms long colas that
Mosca Seeds, Europe

look like a sea of fat arms at a rock concert - the only

Indica-Dominant

difference being that these arms hold killer nugs rather

Genetics: C4 x C99

than lighters, and the plants are wearing tshirts that

Potency: THC 18%

state the band they’re going to see on them. These

seedsman.com

plants will be fully finished after 60 days of flowering,
and they won’t stretch much at any stage of growth, so

they make a great choice for the indoor grower. Just be aware that you might have
to pump AC/DC and Springsteen in to their grow room to keep them super happy
and convince them to produce the largest amount of bud possible. In order to pre¬
serve the absolutely killer taste of this strain, it’s best to go with an organic grow or
to flush with molasses in the final two weeks of flowering. Make sure you get any
chemicals out! If you get growing conditions just right, your Tsi Fly harvest will be
super heavy, with big tight nugs and dense colas.
Unusually, Tsi Fly buds taste very strongly of apricot, which is a nice surprise the
first time you take in a full bong hit and don’t know what’s coming! This flavor took me
right back to my Grandma’s kitchen, when I was a chubby little kid eating apricot jam
straight from the jar and getting it all over my fat face. The high is just as hectic as the
taste; a serious double knock out punch that is like crashing your car into a giant pillow
at high speed. Don’t try to get up and don’t try to make sense. Just enjoy the sit down
stone and let it take you into sleep!
Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
178

Vanilluna
mmmt.

If you haven’t smoked DJ Short’s game-changing Blueberry, than your career as a
pot smoker has yet to reach its peak. If you have had the pleasure of puffing on a
pipe of Blueberry, don’t worry - you’ve still got a whole world of amazing Blue offspring
to explore, too. Vanilluna is one of these, having been created from an Original Blue¬
berry male and a Blueberry Sativa female. It’s also known as Vanilla Moon, which
makes me want to suck on the Earth’s only satellite like a lollipop.
As a quasi-hybrid, Vanilluna grows to a medium height but in an indica growth pat¬
tern. 15% of Vanilluna plants will be varied in their growth, while the vast majority will
give uniform plants. The flowering time of all types is between 55 and 60 days, after
the buds have swollen to their largest size and the trichomes are absolutely gleaming.
The breeders recommend giving these plants an extended vegetative period with early
topping to increase the yield, although they also grow well untopped in a SOG system.
You’ll understand why some call this strain Vanilla Moon when you’re transported
wmmmmaammmmmmmmmmmammm

to a dreamy, chilled out planet of your own making after

DJ Short Seeds, Canada

smoking a bowl or two. While your body is feeling fluffy

Indica-Dominant

your mind will be calm and clear, leaving you more re-

Genetics: Blueberry

laxed than a fat old cat sitting in the sun and getting its

Sativa x Original Blueberry

belly rubbed. Pure bliss.

Cannabis Indica The Essentia! Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
180

HR.
i*'' ’>', 't'fveta, &**! ‘ ’■'/'• . •

Mk

.

■' / ‘.'j'
>Vvc;

V < »*

1™

Viuda Blanca
Spain’s Pitt Bully Seeds are a great little company sending out some fantastic strains
around Europe and beyond. Viuda Blanca, as any fans of mid-90s Colombian telenov-

elas will already know, is Spanish for White Widow - one of the most famous hybrid
strains that has ever been released. This Spanish White Widow, however, is a little dif¬
ferent to the one that many North American takers may know and love. It still contains a
mix of Brazilian Manga Rosa and a South Indian plant, but with a delightful Spanish flair.
This makes for a very exotic cross, and one that is only marginally indica-dominant.
As with all more balanced hybrids, Viuda Blanca can grow taller than pure indica
strains, topping out at up to 6 feet tall, although you can ensure that the plants don t
grow beyond your grow room by cutting down on their vegetative stage and keeping
them in smaller pots. Indoor plants will rarely grow beyond 3 feet in height. These
plants are very adaptive to whatever situation you put them in and cherish the thrill
that an outdoor guerrilla grow throws at them. Indoors, they can be easily grown in 2---

gallon pots but they will need special attention when it

Pitt Bully Seeds, Spain

comes to watering; make sure you don’t overfeed but do

Indica-Dominant

make sure they’ve got enough water to thrive at all times.

Genetics: Brazilian

Outdoor growers can expect to harvest around 500

Manga Rosa x South

grams, while indoor growers should expect something in

Indian

the region of 400 grams per square yard of grow space.

Potency: THC 18-21%

Outdoor growers in the Northern Hemisphere should

pittbully.com

plant in April and harvest in September, while Southern

laabuelaverde.com

growers should plant in October and harvest in March.
The flowering time of this strain sits at 56 days, which,

incidentally, is about as long as that Colombian telenovela feels like it goes on for.
With such a marginal prevalence of indica genetics over sativa, you would expect
Viuda Blanca to have a particularly balanced high with the potential to sway one way
or the other, depending on the smoker and the setting - and you’d be completely
right. This is a chameleon of a stone, meaning that it will take on the properties of its
background and setting and fit right in. If you’re sailing through life on a natural high,
then this will give you a step up and keep your mind going at full tilt. If you’re feeling
that you need to slow down, however, this strain can give you a relaxing head and
body stone that seriously chills you out. Much like the Colombian telenovela subject
that shares its name, Viuda Blanca will come in to your life, run riot, then be out of it
again before you know it - so make sure you enjoy it while you have it! Maria!

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
182

i mi
i: §*
• 1A m
W^'''-,}'h

| • \V

Warlock
Originally produced by Magus Genetics and now being put out by the fantastic Serious
Seeds, Warlock is, as you’d expect it to be, a solid and dependable strain that can
pack a serious punch if you get on the wrong side of it! As an indica-dominant cross
between Skunk #1 and an Afghani indica that was first released in the early 90s, this
strain also has Mexican and Columbian heritage so is a very interesting strain to both
grow and smoke!
Growers will love Warlock due to its lack of leaves and its huge density of flowers,
even on smaller plants. This makes trimming an absolute dream, and you feel like
Edward Scissorhands when after just a few seconds of chopping the nugs look good
enough to eat! After a flowering time of 60 days you can expect to harvest up to 500
grams of awesome Warlock bud per square meter of grow space.
The word “warlock” comes from the Old Norse for “caller of spirits”, and the sativalike high of this strain certainly makes you feel that the spirits have been called right
to you! With more of a head high than a body stone, this
Developed by Magus

is a very active high, but don’t be toking this before a

Genetics; now produced

marathon, heading out for a big grocery shop or in fact

by Serious Seeds, Holland

anything too taxing, as it does still numb your ap-

Indica-Dominant

pendages out a fair bit!

Genetics: Skunk/Afghani
x Afghani
Potency: THC 20-23%
seriousseeds.com

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
184

Westside
It’s obvious to pretty much everyone in the European breeding scene that Holland’s
All Star Genetics have got some serious experience under their belts. They’ve been
growing since the early 90s, and such fantastic strains as Westside illustrate that all
this work has not been wasted! This Afghani x Northern Lights cross capitalizes on
the great Northern Lights effect, whilst making this cross more weighted towards the
indica influence and, therefore, much easier to grow.
This plant is a great indoor strain, as it grows only to 4 or 5 feet but yields a huge
amount of great bud. It is also one of ASG’s fastest strains, finishing fully between 8
and 9 weeks. If you’re partial to outdoor growing then Westside will do fine there too,
although watch out for mold in more humid climates. No matter where you grow this
strain you can expect a killer harvest of around 450 grams per square meter of grow
space, although you’d be forgiven for thinking that each bud weighs 450 grams itself,
given the crazy density of these gorgeous nugs!
You can’t get much more gorgeously indica than this
ASG Seeds, Holland

type of strain; the subtle taste gives way to a totally un-

Indica-Dominant

subtle brick wall of a body stone that will pin you like Bret

Genetics: Afghani x

"The Hitman” Hart and lay you down like cheap laminate

Northern Lights

flooring. It’s the best there is.

Cannabis Indica The Essentia! Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
186

White Afghan
Philosopher Seeds are a cool company working out of Spain, where presumably they
read the works of Plato, Goethe and Sartre when they’re not breeding cannabis plants
and getting mad high. Their White Afghan comprises Afghani and White Widow ge¬
netics, making it a fairly balanced hybrid with just a slight indica dominance.
These plants are very dense and stay very small, and so they work extremely well
in a SOG operation. The breeders also comment that growing White Afghan at a den¬
sity of 25 plants per square meter of grow space and using 3.5 liter pots is a fantastic
way to really get the best out of this strain. If you prefer to grow with less density in
your grow room, then topping the main cola might be preferred. This is an easy plant
to look after, even for new and inexperienced growers, and should be ready for har¬
vest in 55 days, or at the end of September in a Northern Hemisphere outdoor grow.
Outdoor growers will get a yield of 450 grams per plant, whereas indoor growers can
expect 350 grams per square yard of grow room.
mhmhmhhmmmmb

This is the closest weed has ever come to smelling

Philosopher Seeds,

like a bunch of fresh-cut flowers, and the smoke is only

Spain

slightly less wholesome-tasting. The high, too, is pretty

Indica-Dominant

clean cut: very clear, enjoyable head and body high

Genetics: Afghani x

that’s great for a daytime toke!

White Widow
Potency: THC 14-16%
philosopherseeds.com

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
188

Before now, I didn’t realize that Spain’s Buddha Seeds were amateur astrologists.
Now I realize that they must be, to give this strain such a clever name. In astrology
terms, a white dwarf -also known as a degenerate dwarf, which is a bit of a racial
diss, if you ask me! - is what almost all the stars in our galaxy will eventually become,
as they are not large or heavy enough to become neutron stars. In the simplest terms,
a white dwarf is an incredibly dense small star, and amazingly enough this is also a
perfect description of Buddha Seeds’ Lowryder / White Widow cross. Was this just a
cool fluke, or do the breeders at Buddha Seeds search the skies nightly for inspira¬
tions for their fantastic original strains? I guess we’ll never know.
The Lowrdyer parentage of this strain makes it an autoflowering variety, so it needs
no change of light cycle to flip into flowering; instead it just marches right into the final
growth stage when it is good and ready! This is just another trait that makes White
Dwarf such a ‘star’, but it’s not the only one. White Dwarf, as the name suggests, is
as small as it is dense, and is a great yielder for one that
Buddha Seeds, Spain

takes up such little space. In fact, for hobby growers who

Auto-Flowering Indica-

don’t have much room, you’ll be hard pressed to find a

Dominant

more suitable strain. It hardly needs any room, time or

Genetics: Lowryder x

care, and you’ll need to put more effort into actually

White Widow

killing the thing than you will need to put in to keep it

Potency: TFIC 15%

alive! The most effort will be expended in germinating

buddhaseedbank.com

the seeds, which are made for harsh winters so don’t
pop as easily as some others. White Dwarf crops will be

fully mature and ready for harvest after 8 weeks, regardless of the light cycles, so it
doesn’t matter if you grow it inside or outdoors; 8 weeks is all it will ever need. It is
also quite the looker; the buds are totally white, and to my delight especially, look like
miniature Christmas trees that have been dusted with the first snows of winter. I might
be getting a tad overly romantic here, but it’s difficult not to when your plants are so
goof looking!
Like the heat of a white dwarf just after it’s formed, the high of this strain will feel
explosive at first, but will gradually radiate away down the rest of your body and will
calm down from there. Also like a white dwarf, the high is a lingerer, and will continue
to be there for what feels like several million light years. If this strain doesn’t have you
buying a telescope and staring at the skies while you’re high as a far sun, I don’t know
what will. A star in every sense of the word!
Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
190

White Siberian
Dinafem have spent the last few years absolutely killing it in their native Spain and
beyond. Their strains always hit the mark with their genetics and their fantastic good
looks. White Siberian is a mix of White Widow and AK-47 genetics, hence the nod to
Russia in its name, and with such quality parental genetics this little strain has a lot
to live up to!
Thankfully, White Siberian more than delivers on the promise of its parents; finishing
in 60 days, and mid October outdoors, this plant can grow up to 8 feet outside thanks
to its strong sativa influence along with the indica prevalence. The wide, deep green
leaves are a delight for indica lovers and it grows at a moderate speed, making it asy
to manage. It’s also an extremely hardy plant, resistant to colder temperatures out in
the wild and absolutely covered in resin when the time for harvest comes around!
Your finished White Siberian buds will be anything but white, with hues of green
and flourishes of orange making the nugs look like candy wrappers. The flavor is like
pineapple - fruity but with a harsh tang - and the effect
Dinafem Seeds, Spain

has a good dose of sativa psychoactivity all wrapped

Indica-Dominant

up in a great and long-lasting indica body buzz. It’s the

Genetics: White Widow

best of both worlds, a perfect hybrid of two great strains

x AK-47

and a treat for all!

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
192

t

Wild Zombie
I should probably state right now that I am a huge fan of Rob Zombie, George A.
Romero, “Dead Set” (Google it) and “The Walking Dead,” so I was always going to
love this strain from America’s Bortnick Farms. However, even those who don’t enjoy
their dead undead will love Wild Zombie for the quality of its genetics, coming as they
do from White Widow, Kush, Purple Kush and Big Blue.
Like its namesakes, it is almost impossible to kill this strain. It can handle very ex¬
cessive conditions, and will continue to thrive even when you think it must be dead
and gone. Clones of Wild Zombie will be just as difficult to get rid of, and once they
mature these kids can grow to 7 feet or more indoors. The only way to stop Wild Zom¬
bie is to chop off the head - and the arms, and the rest of it entirely, dry the buds and
get mad high. This should only be done after 56 days, otherwise you might anger the
rest of the crop, and who knows what might happen then?
Wild Zombie will trick you with its incredibly sweet smell and orangey taste, then
when you’re not looking...BAM! You’ll feel it bite right in,
Bortnick Farms, USA

then your body will slowly wind down and stop. Your

Indica-Dominant

body won’t be yours to control, and the only sounds

Genetics: (White Widow

coming from you will be muffled groans. Sounds like a

x Kush) x Big Blue x

great night to me!

Cannabis indica The Essentia! Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
194

Zei
Switzerland’s Tiki Seedbank may not be as well known as Greenhouse or Sensi
Seeds, but the work they’re doing in their native Europe is more than worthy of world¬
wide respect. The head breeder at Tiki discovered hemp cultivation back in the early
80s, when he first began growing outdoors with seeds from Thailand. Later that
decade he brought seeds back from Mexico, then in the next few decades he went
around the world collecting fantastic seeds from such places as Pakistan, Colombia,
Ghana, Morocco and Nepal. This endeavor was never intended to end with a seed
company, but rather to end up with the plants that the breeder himself considered
perfect - but the reaction of his friends to the resulting plants meant that the idea for
the Tiki Seedbank was planted (if you’ll pardon the pun) and never went away. This
strain combines two of his best plants, Mazar and his own Shulam strain, to create a
new Swiss classic that should be smoked around the world!
Zei is a great choice for indoor growers, as its heavy indica dominance means that
it stays short, squat and incredibly bushy throughout its
Tiki Seedbank,

life cycle. With a maximum height of 3 feet, even a

Switzerland

hobby grower with only a college dorm to grow in can

Indica-Dominant

grow enough Zei weed to keep himself high as a kite for

Genetics: Mazar x

the whole semester. These plants will grow with a cen¬

Shulam

tralized cola and a very compact, very strong structure;

Potency: THC 18-20%

a herd of cows could stomp through your grow room and

tikiseedbank.com

your Zei plants would probably still be standing. I don’t
recommend trying this, though. The structure of your

plant will tighten up during its vegetative growth period and it won’t tend to stretch
during this time at all. The breeder tells us that this strain is great for taking clones
that are meant to be flowered immediately - a trick that will keep your plants even
smaller and enhance the use of your grow space even more. Both indoor and outdoor
growers can expect a harvest that’s beyond the usual, and all with a flowering period
of 55 days. Outdoor growers should be ready to harvest around the end of October,
if growing in the Northern Hemisphere.
This is a great indica-dominant strain with an almost perfect indica effect, making
it great for patients with chronic body pain. The effect is a very relaxed one, with a
stone that rolls in slowly and sets up camp for as long as you want it to. It’s perfect
pot for the end of a party or for a lazy Sunday in summer when you want to do nothing
more than chill in the sun with a cider and a corndog.

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
196

"W

IL

/WmM

Zensation
MBianaMmmiiiiiimwffiiim

Holland’s Ministry of Cannabis might not be an official governmental department, but
they certainly do act like one. They only give away their breeding secrets on a strict
need-to-know basis, and as most of us don’t need to know, we’re a little out of luck.
They can tell us, however, that their fabulous Zensation brings together genetics from
an indica hybrid and a strain from the White family, which in itself is enough to make
most tokers more than a little intrigued.
The indica influence shows itself in the Zensation growth pattern, as it only gets to
3.5 feet tall and finishes fully in between 8 and 9 weeks. The breeders recommend
topping your Zensation crop to encourage the best growth, but beware not to fertilize
too much or the plants will not be pleased. An outdoor Zensation plant can yield up
to 400 grams.
Zensation is extremely strong and very long lasting, so settle in for a good session
rather than smoking this as a wake ‘n bake. Interestingly, this strain comes highly rec-

■HHHHBHiDHHnBHHHnHun

omiTiended as one that’s great to toke before you “get

Ministry of Cannabis,

down to business,” if you know what I mean. It might not

Holland

be an herbal alternative to Viagra but it will get your blow

Indica-Dominant

flowing and your mind running riot - so light the candles

Genetics: Indica Hybrid x

and put on some Barry White!
——..

White Strain

Potency: THC 20-24%
ministryofcannabis.com

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
198

Zindica
The USA’s Bumboklot Seeds (and if you don’t know what Bumboklot is in Jamaican
slang, I don’t want to tell you) was founded by the great breeder Bumboklot, a man
who has over 35 years of growing experience behind him and isn’t afraid to show it!
This strain is a blend of Northern Lights, G-13, AK-47 and Jamaican Kingsbreed ge¬
netics, which is about the equivalent of getting Angelina Jolie pregnant by Johnny
Depp, Will Smith and Brad Pitt all at the same time and then putting that kid into acting
school: it’s always going to be a winner.
With such a star on your hands you don’t want to treat her with anything but re¬
spect, so preserve Zindica’s best traits by growing in a high-quality soil mix with as
few nutrients as you can manage - she can handle herself pretty well without the help
of enhancements, but a little extra feeding won’t hurt. The breeder recommends a
10-gallon container, which seems a little harsh on such a princess, if you ask me!
It’s not just Zindica’s looks that will make you, and the rest of the world, fall in love
with her; she packs an amazing stone that’s balanced
Bumboklot Seeds, USA

and strong without being overbearing. She tastes like

Indica-Dominant

grapefruit and smokes like a dream, and she’s a hell of

Genetics: NL x G-13 x

a lot of fun to be around - in fact, she might just be the

AK-47 x Jamaican

perfect woman!

Cannabis indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
200

Index
A

Blue Magoo, 14

The Beast, 166

blue strains

Berreck, 6

Advanced Seeds, 176

. see also purple strains

Black Karma Kush, 8

aeroponic systems

Blue Dot, 12

Blue Angel, 10

Purple Kush x Blue

Blue Dot, 12

Black Karma Kush, 8
Pacific Coast Kush, 116

Apollo, 130

Blue Magoo, 14

Afghan Mountain Black, 2

Blueberry strains

Bubba Kush, 16

AK-47 strains

Blue Angel, 10

Canna Sutra, 18

Chronic, 26

Blue Magoo, 14

Caramelice, 20

Forfiter Special, 40

Fruit Spirit, 42

Cherry Cheese x G-13, 22

White Siberian, 192

ICE, 70

Cherry Hemmingway, 24

Zindica, 200

Skunkberry, 150

Chitral Kush, xv

Alphakronik Genetics, 78

StarBerry, 162

Chronic, xvii, 26

Alpine Seeds, 94

Vanilluna (Vanilla Moon),

Colorado Kool-Aid, 28

Apothecary Genetics, 84

Cripit, 30

180

ASG Seeds, 186

Bonguru Seeds, 136

Delirium, 32

Auto Stoned, 4

Bortnick Farms, 194

Dready Auto Jack, 34

Autofem Seeds, 4

Bubba Kush, 16

Dutch Delight, 36

auto-flowering strains

Buddha Seeds, 190

Fayaka, 38

Auto Stoned, 4

Bulldog Seeds, The, 114

Forfiter Special, 40

Dready Auto Jack, 34

Bumboklot Seeds, ix, 200

Fruit Spirit, 42

c

Funxta’z Get Rite, 44

Hindu Kush Auto, 66
Purple Ryder, 132

G-13 Skunk, xvii

Top 69, 176

Cali Gold Genetics, 50

G-13 Skunk (IBL), 48

White Dwarf, 190

Canna Sutra, 18

G-Bomb, 46

CannaBioGen, 164

Grape Diesel, 50

cannabis

Grape Escape, 52

B
Barney’s Farm, xv

as fiber, xiii, xiv

Grapefruit Diesel, 54

The Beast, 166

indica origins, xiii-xv

Green Shark, 56

Berreck, 6

THC, xvii, xviii

Hash Plant, xvii, 58

Big Buddha Seeds, 46

cannabis breeders, see

Heaven, 60

BillBerry Farms, 174

seed banks

Hellriser, 62

Black Karma Kush, 8

Cannabis Cultivation

Herijuana Jack 33, 64

Blazing Pistileros, 100
Blim Burn Seeds, 110

(Thomas), ix
cannabis strains by name

Hindu Kush Auto, 66
The Hog, 168

Blue Angel, 10

Afghan Mountain Black, 2

Holland’s Hope, 68

Blue Dot, 12

Auto Stoned, 4

ICE, 70

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
202

Ice Cream, 72

Purple Ryder, 132

Iranian G-13, 74

The Purps, 170

Caramelice, 20

Irukandji, 76

Querkle, 134

Ch9 Female Seeds, 64

Jackpot Royale, 78

Rock Star, 136

ChemDawg strains

Jade Superfrosty, 80

Rocklock, 138

Kafiristanica, xvii

Royal Purple Kush, 140

Cherry Cheese x G-13, 22

Kandy Kush, 82

Shishkaberry, 142

Cherry Hemmingway, 24

Kushman's Silverback

Siberian Queen, 144

Chitral Kush, xv

SkaSkunk, 146

Chronic, xvii, 26

L.A. Ultra x Bubblicious, 86

Skittles, 8

closet systems

Lady Purple, 88

Skunk NL, 148

Dutch Delight, 36

Lavender, 90

Skunkberry, 150

Fayaka, 38

Lebanese Bekaa, 92

Slyder, 152

G-13 Skunk (IBL), 48

Lebanese Landrace, 94

Smile, 154

Hash Plant, 58

Mango, 96

Snow White, 156

Hindu Kush Auto, 66

Master Thai’s Green

Special Kannabia, 158

Purple Ryder, 132

Spiritual Punk, 160

White Dwarf, 190

Grape Ape, 84

Dragon BX7, 98

Zindica, ix, 200

Forfiter Special, 40

Mau-Mau, 100

StarBerry, 162

Colorado Kool-Aid, 28

Meen Green Hillbilly, 102

Sugar Loaf, 164

Cripit, 30

Melon Gum, 104

Thunderbud, 172

Mind Body and Soul

Tingo Sour Kush, 174

D

(MBS), 106

Top 69, 176

De Sjamaan Seeds, 88

Molokai Frost, 108

Tsi Fly, 178

Delirium, 32

Mountain Mist, xv

Vanilla Kush, xv

Delta 9 Labs, 18

Narkosis, 110

Vanilluna (Vanilla Moon),

Diesel strains

Nice Chunk, 112

180

Black Karma Kush, 8

O.Z. Kush, 114

Viuda Blanca, 182

Fayaka, 38

Pacific Coast Kush, 116

Warlock, 184

Forfiter Special, 40

Papa’s Candy, 118

Westside, 186

Grape Diesel, 50

Point of No Return, 120

White Afghan, 188

Grapefruit Diesel, 54

Pollen Chuck, 122

White Dwarf, 190

Pollen Chuck, 122

Purple Afghani, 124

White Siberian, 192

Tingo Sour Kush, 174

Purple Elegance, 126

Wild Zombie, 194

Dinafem Seeds, 192

Purple Fuck V2, 128

X-18, xv

DJ Short, 10, 14

Purple Kush, xv

X-18 Pure Pakistani, xv

DJ Short Seeds, 10, 14, 180

Purple Kush x Blue

Zei, 196

DNA Genetics, 138

Zensation, 198

Don’t Panic Organix, 44

Apollo, 130

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
203

Index
Douglass, Frederick, xi

Gage Green Genetics, 126

L.A. Ultra x Bubblicious, 86

Dr. Canem and Company

Ganja Creator Genetics, 22

Pacific Coast Kush, 116

Ganjah Seeds, 144

Snow White, 156

Dr. Greenthumb Seeds, 74

G-Bomb, 46

StarBerry, 162

Dr. Underground, 104

Gibridov.Net, 2

Dready Auto Jack, 34

Grape Diesel, 50

l

Dready Seeds, 34

Grape Escape, 52

ICE, 70

Duck, Wally, 106

Grapefruit Diesel, 54

Ice Cream, 72

Dutch Delight, 36

Green Haven Genetics, 12

Illuminati Seeds, 76

Dutch Passion Seeds, 68

Green House Seed Co., 16

indica

Dynasty Seeds, 14

Green Life Medical Center, 28

characteristics of, xv-xviii

E

Green Shark, 56

natural hybridization,

Seeds, 146

greenhouse grows

Emerald Triangle Seeds, 140

Delirium, 32

Eva Female Seeds, 118

G-13 Skunk (IBL), 48

xiv-xv
origins of, xiii-xv
indoor grow rooms

H

Black Karma Kush, 8

Hash Plant, xvii, 58

G-Bomb, 46

Fayaka, 38

Heaven, 60

Hash Plant, 58

Female Seeds, 70

Hellriser, 62

Hellriser, 62

Finest Medicinal Seeds, 148

Herijuana Jack 33, 64

ICE, 70

Flying Dutchmen, 36

Hero Seeds, 56

indica characteristics, xviii

Forfiter Special, 40

High Bred Seeds, 132

Jade Superfrosty, 80

420Clones, 130

Hill, Tom, xv

L.A. Ultra x Bubblicious, 86

Fruit Spirit, 42

Hindu Kush Auto, 66

Papa’s Candy, 118

Funxta, Eddie, 44

The Hog, 168

Purple Elegance, 126

Funxta’z Get Rite, 44

Holland’s Hope, 68

Purple Fuck V2, 128

G

Holy Smoke Seeds, 172

Rocklock, 138

Homegrown Fantaseeds, 96

Siberian Queen, 144

G-13 Skunk (IBL), 48

HortiLab Seed Company, 162

Slyder, 152

G-13 strains

Humber Valley Seeds, 52

Tsi Fly, 178

hydroponic systems

Westside, 186

Evil Seeds, 62

F

Cherry Cheese x G-13, 22

Fruit Spirit, 42

Zei, 196

G-13 Skunk, xvii

Auto Stoned, 4

G-13 Skunk (IBL), 48

Black Karma Kush, 8

Inkognyto, 76

Iranian G-13, 74

Dready Auto Jack, 34

Iranian G-13, 74

Nice Chunk, 112

G-Bomb, 46

Irukandji, 76

Zindica, 200

Irukandji, 76

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
204

ill—WWW rTft'Tr’

J

Afghan Mountain Black, 2

Colorado Kool-Aid, 28

Fayaka, 38

Cripit, 30

Jackpot Royale, 78

Iranian G-13, 74

Forfiter Special, 40

Jade Superfrosty, 80

Lebanese Bekaa, 92

Funxta’z Get Rite, 44

Joint Doctor, 132

Lebanese Landrace, 94

G-13 Skunk, xvii

K

Master Thai’s Green

Green Shark, 56

Dragon BX7, 98

Hash Plant, xvii

Kafiristanica, xvii

Molokai Frost, 108

Hindu Kush Auto, 66

Kandy Kush, 82

Papa’s Candy, 118

ICE, 70

Kannabia Breeding Team,

Point of No Return, 120

Jackpot Royale, 78

Slyder, 152

Jade Superfrosty, 80

158
Karmaceuticals LLC, 8

Lavender, 90

Kingdom Organic Seeds, 24

Lebanese Bekaa, 92

Kush strains, xv

Lebanese Landrace, 94

Black Karma Kush, 8

Lowlife Seeds, 66

Bubba Kush, 16

Lowryder strains

Hindu Kush Auto, 66

Hindu Kush Auto, 66

Jackpot Royale, 78

White Dwarf, 190

Kandy Kush, 82

Marijuana Hillbilly maga¬
zine, 102
Master Thai’s Green
Dragon BX7, 98
Meen Green Hillbilly, 102
Mind Body and Soul
(MBS), 106
Northern Lights, xviii

Lady Purple, 88

M

O.Z. Kush, 114

medical marijuana, xviii

Magus Genetics, 184

Papa’s Candy, 118

O.Z. Kush, 114

Mandala Seeds, 120

Point of No Return, 120

Pacific Coast Kush, 116

Mango, 96

Purple Fuck V2, 128

Purple Afghani, 124

Marijuana Hillbilly, 102

Purple Kush x Blue

Purple Kush x Blue

Marijuana Hillbilly maga¬

Apollo, 130

Apollo, 130

zine, 102

Shishkaberry, 142

Royal Purple Kush, 140

Master Thai Seeds, 98

Skunk NL, 148

Tingo Sour Kush, 174

Master Thai’s Green

Spiritual Punk, 160

Vanilla Kush, xv
Wild Zombie, 194
Kushman’s Silverback

Dragon BX7, 98

Top 69, 176

Mau-Mau, 100

Treating Yourself, 148

medical marijuana, x-xi, xvii

Zei, 196

Grape Ape, 84

Berreck, 6

Meen Green Hillbilly, 102

L

Black Karma Kush, 8

Melon Gum, 104

Blue Angel, 10

M.G.M. Genetics, 6

L.A. Ultra x Bubblicious, 86

Blue Dot, 12

Mind Body and Soul (MBS),

Lady Purple, 88

Cherry Hemmingway, 24

landrace strains

Chronic, xvii, 26

106
Ministry of Cannabis, 198

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
205

Index
molasses, 20, 86, 178

Jackpot Royale, 78

Grape Diesel, 50

Molokai Frost, 108

L.A. Ultra x Bubblicious, 86

Grape Escape, 52

Moonunit, 106

Mau-Mau, 100

Jackpot Royale, 78

Mosca Seeds, 178

Purple Elegance, 126

Kushman’s Silverback

Mountain Mist, xv

The Purps, 170

Mr. Nice Seeds, xvii, 48

Tsi Fly, 178

N
Narkosis, 110

Nice Chunk, 112
North of Seeds, 166
Northern Lights strains, xviii
Blue Dot, 12

L.A. Ultra x Bubblicious, 86

outdoor growing systems

Lady Purple, 88

Jackpot Royale, 78

Lavender, 90

Kushman’s Silverback

Meen Green Hillbilly,

Next Generation Seed
Company, 54

Grape Ape, 84

102

Grape Ape, 84
L.A. Ultra x Bubblicious, 86

Pollen Chuck, 122

Molokai Frost, 108

Purple Afghani, 124

O.Z. Kush, 114

Purple Elegance, 126

P

Purple Kush, xv
Purple Kush x Blue

Chronic, xvii, 26

Pacific Coast Kush, 116

Funxta’z Get Rite, 44

Papa’s Candy, 118

Purple Ryder, 132

Green Shark, 56

Paradise Seeds, 72

Royal Purple Kush, 140

Hash Plant, 58

Peak Seeds, 150

Shishkaberry, 142

Heaven, 60

Philosopher Seeds, 188

StarBerry, 162

Skunk NL, 148

Pitt Bully Seeds, 182

Thunderbud, 172

Slyder, 152

Point of No Return, 120

Wild Zombie, 194

Snow White, 156

Pollen Chuck, 122

The Purps, 170

Spiritual Punk, 160

Poor White Farmer Seeds,

Q

Top 69, 176

142

Apollo, 130

Westside, 186

Positronics Seeds, 20

Querkle, 134

Zindica, 200

Purple Afghani, 124

R

o

Purple Elegance, 126
Purple Fuck V2, 128

Red Star Farms, 80

OG Genetics, 116

Purple Kush, xv

Reserva Privada, xv, 82

organic grows

Purple Kush x Blue Apollo,

Resin Seeds, 86

Blue Magoo, 14

130

The Rev, 24

Cherry Hemmingway, 24

Purple Ryder, 132

Riot Seeds, 128

Colorado Kool-Aid, 28

purple strains

Rock Star, 136

Forfiter Special, 40

. see also blue strains

Rocklock, 138

Funxta’z Get Rite, 44

Black Karma Kush, 8

Rokerij Seeds, 60

G-13 Skunk (IBL), 48

Cripit, 30

Royal Purple Kush, 140

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
206

Royal Queen Seeds, 42

Cali Gold Genetics, 50

High Bred Seeds, 132

ruderalis

CannaBioGen, 164

Holy Smoke Seeds, 172

Ch9 Female Seeds, 64

Homegrown Fan-

De Sjamaan Seeds, 88

taseeds, 96

auto-flowering strains, 4, 34

s

Delta 9 Labs, 18

Sagarmatha Seeds, 152

Dinafem Seeds, 192

Samsara Seeds, 160

DJ Short Seeds, 10, 14,

sativa, xiii, xvii-xviii
ScrOG (Screen of Green)
systems
Black Karma Kush, 8
Cherry Hemmingway, 24

180

HortiLab Seed Com¬
pany, 162
Humber Valley Seeds, 52
Illuminati Seeds, 76

DNA Genetics, 138
Don’t Panic Organix, 44
Dr. Canem and Com¬
pany Seeds, 146

Kannabia Breeding
Team, 158
Karmaceuticals LLC, 8
Kingdom Organic

Colorado Kool-Aid, 28

Dr. Greenthumb Seeds, 74

Forfiter Special, 40

Dr. Underground, 104

Lowlife Seeds, 66

Kandy Kush, 82

Dready Seeds, 34

Magus Genetics, 184

Master Thai’s Green

Dutch Passion Seeds, 68

Mandala Seeds, 120

Dynasty Seeds, 14

Marijuana Hillbilly, 102

Emerald Triangle Seeds,

Master Thai Seeds, 98

Dragon BX7, 98
Meen Green Hillbilly, 102
Querkle, 134
Top 69, 176

140

Seeds, 24

M.G.M. Genetics, 6

Eva Female Seeds, 118

Ministry of Cannabis, 198

Evil Seeds, 62

Mosca Seeds, 178

Advanced Seeds, 176

Female Seeds, 70

Mr. Nice Seeds, xvii, 48

Alphakronik Genetics, 78

Finest Medicinal Seeds,

Next Generation Seed

seed banks

Alpine Seeds, 94

148

Company, 54

Apothecary Genetics, 84

Flying Dutchmen, 36

North of Seeds, 166

ASG Seeds, 186

420Clones, 130

OG Genetics, 116

Autofem Seeds, 4

Gage Green Genetics,

Paradise Seeds, 72

Barney’s Farm, xv
Big Buddha Seeds, 46
BillBerry Farms, 174

126

Peak Seeds, 150

Ganja Creator Genetics,
22

Philosopher Seeds, 188
Pitt Bully Seeds, 182

Blazing Pistileros, 100

Ganjah Seeds, 144

Blim Burn Seeds, 110

Gibridov.Net, 2

Bonguru Seeds, 136

Green Haven Genetics, 12

Positronics Seeds, 20

Bortnick Farms, 194

Green House Seed Co., 16

Red Star Farms, 80

Buddha Seeds, 190

Green Life Medical Cen¬

Reserva Privada, xv, 82

Bulldog Seeds, The, 114
Bumboklot Seeds, ix, 200

Poor White Farmer
Seeds, 142

Resin Seeds, 86

ter, 28
Hero Seeds, 56

Riot Seeds, 128

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
207

index
White Afghan, 188

Rokerij Seeds, 60

Cherry Cheese x G-13, 22

Royal Queen Seeds, 42

Chronic, 26

SoHum Seeds, 10

Sagarmatha Seeds, 152

Dutch Delight, 36

Soma Seeds, 90

Samsara Seeds, 160

G-13 Skunk, xvii

Southern Star Seeds, 112

Sensi Seeds, xvii, 58

G-13 Skunk (IBL), 48

Special Kannabia, 158

Serious Seeds, xvii, 26,

Green Shark, 56

Spiritual Punk, 160

Heaven, 60

Spliff Seeds, 156

SoHum Seeds, 10

Hellriser, 62

StarBerry, 162

Soma Seeds, 90

ICE, 70

Stoney Girl Gardens, 30

Southern Star Seeds, 112

Lavender, 90

Subcool/Team Green

Spliff Seeds, 156

Mountain Mist, xv

Stoney Girl Gardens, 30

Siberian Queen, 144

Sugar Loaf, 164

Subcool/Team Green

SkaSkunk, 146

Supreme Beans, 108

Skunk NL, 148

T

184

Avengers, 134

Avengers, 134

Supreme Beans, 108

Skunkberry, 150

TH Seeds, 168

Special Kannabia, 158

TH Seeds, 168

Tiki Seedbank, 196

Warlock, 184

THC, xvii, xviii

Tom Hill, xv

Skunkberry, 150

Thomas, Mel, ix

TreeTown Seeds, 124

Slyder, 152

Thunderbud, 172

Ultimate Seeds, 40

Smile, 154

Tiki Seedbank, 196

Underground Originals,

Snow White, 156

Tingo Sour Kush, 174

SOG (Sea of Green) sys¬

Top 69, 176

154
Vulkania Seeds, 38

tems

Trainwreck, 82

Weed.co.za, 92

Forfiter Special, 40

Treating Yourself, 148

Wizards of Oz, 106

Fruit Spirit, 42

TreeTown Seeds, 124

World of Seeds, 32

Grapefruit Diesel, 54

Tsi Fly, 178

u

Sensi Seeds, xvii, 58

The Hog, 168

Serious Seeds, xvii, 26, 184

Ice Cream, 72

Shishkaberry, 142

Kandy Kush, 82

Ultimate Seeds, 40

Short, DJ, 10, 14, 180

Master Thai’s Green

Underground Originals, 154

Siberian Queen, 144

Dragon BX7, 98

v

SkaSkunk, 146

Pollen Chuck, 122

Skittles, 8

Snow White, 156

Vanilla Kush, xv

Skunk Magazine, 24

Tingo Sour Kush, 174

Vanilluna (Vanilla Moon), 180

Skunk NL, 148

Top 69, 176

Vavilov, Nikolai, xvii

Skunk strains

Vanilluna (Vanilla Moon),

Viuda Blanca, 182

Caramelice, 20

180

Vulkania Seeds, 38

Cannabis fndica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2

w
Warlock, 184
Washington, George, xi
Weed.co.za, 92
Westside, 186
White Afghan, 188
White Dwarf, 190
White Siberian, 192
Wild Zombie, 194
Wizards of Oz, 106
World of Seeds, 32

X-18, xv
X-18 Pure Pakistani, xv

Zei, 196
Zensation, 198
Zindica, ix, 200

Cannabis Indica The Essential Guide to the World’s Finest Marijuana Strains, Volume 2
209

The World’s Most
Comprehensive and
Detailed Strain Guides
vauvs simNlmo

Each Book
Features 100
Amazing
Strains from
100 Amazing
Breeders!

No other
strain guide
series has
featured
this many
breeders
and strains
before!

Grab these books today!
Check ’em out on Facebook: facebook.com/SativaBook and facebook.com/lndicaBook
To place your credit card order by phone
call: 1-800-635-8883 or 1-916-771-4203
www.fsbookco.com

Published by

A Whole New Flavor!

^53

Strains from IOC
Great Breeders
The only strain guide series to give a complete overview
of today’s best cannabis strains, the Cannabis Indica and

Cannabis Sativa: Essential Guides series is your trusted
source for the most up-to-date information on the genetic
history, growing traits and effects of the best marijuana
strains on earth. From Afghan Mountain Black to the elusive
Zindica, Cannabis Indica, Vol. 2 features 100 of the most
intense, flavorful and potent indicas ever grown.

Full color photos showcase each strain in all its glory and
an introduction by Mel Thomas, master grower and au¬
thor of Cannabis Cultivation: A Complete Grower’s Guide,
makes this a book that should be on every cannabis con¬
noisseur and enthusiast's shelf. This second volume of
the Cannabis Indica series builds on the first books in the
collection to create an encyclopedic guide to the world’s
best marijuana strains.
USD $20.00

ISBN 978-1-937866-01-3

Green Candy Press.com
facebook.com/lndicaBook

