OUTLOOK CANNABIS 
HORTICULTURE 
A serious effort 
Cannabis growers are adopting the high standards of the  consumer-product industry to meet regulatory requirements. 
BY BRIAN OWENS 
For years, the popular image of cannabis  
growers has been scruffy hippies getting  high on their own supply in a disorgan ized underground economy, rather than shiny  white industrial agriculture facilities. Even  larger-scale operations involved minimal qual ity control or lacked formal record keeping. But as legal medical — and increasingly,  recreational — cannabis becomes more wide spread, the cannabis industry is becoming  more professional. By adopting the methods  and rigour of plant science and analytical  chemistry, it is ensuring that it can produce  safe, consistent and high-quality products for  a fast-growing and lucrative market. “As the industry has gotten bigger, they  realized they must transition to use modern  horticultural science,” says Youbin Zheng, a hor ticulture researcher at the University of Guelph,  Canada, who works with cannabis companies. Although small-scale growers of illicit  cannabis can get away with vague descriptions  of strains and considerable variation between  batches, commercial producers have to meet  the same standards as they would for other  consumer products. They need to produce  a reliable product and follow the stringent  
working with cannabis producers to support  and guide this effort. He is studying how the  amount and wavelength of light used in grow ing can affect the plant’s cannabinoid composi tion. Increasing the amount of ultraviolet light,  for example, can increase levels of tetrahydro cannabinol (THC), the main psychoactive  component of cannabis. “We want to create a  lighting recipe which will help producers get a  consistent product,” he says. 
Cannabis companies are quickly adopting  techniques and technologies that were pio neered by commercial agriculture and horti culturalists. Organigram, a cannabis producer  in Moncton, Canada, stringently controls its  growing operations, says Jeff Purcell, vice president of operations. “The growing envi ronment is standardized, and we have full  control over the air, light, temperature and  fertilizer,” he says. “It’s all highly automated  and computer controlled.” 
Organigram’s operation is in stark contrast to  the image of an illicit farm hidden in the woods.  It is entirely indoors, with 52 identical growing  rooms on three floors. Plants are propagated by  cloning, rather than grown from seed, so the  crop’s genetic identity remains the same from  generation to generation. The growers track  and log all growing parameters, and then tweak  
ORGANIGRAM INC. 
of underground growers, they are hiring lots of  university-educated and trained people,” says  Zheng. 
Many of his postgraduate students, he says,  receive job offers from cannabis companies  
rules and regulations that apply to product  labelling and safety in their country. Many of the challenges of large-scale cannabis  production can be solved by drawing on the  experience of the commercial greenhouse  industry, says Zheng. Growing crops commer cially requires a homogenous soil and consistent  irrigation. Small variations can mean that parts  
them as needed to  maintain consistency.  Purcell sees the com pany’s operation as a  ‘manufacturing facility’,  rather than a garden or  a greenhouse. “There  are quality checks like  
“There are  
quality checks  like you would  see in any  
manufacturing  facility.” 
before they have even completed their studies.  Zheng will begin teaching a cannabis produc tion class for undergraduates at the University  of Guelph in January 2020, and several col leges in North America already offer courses  designed to provide skilled workers to the  industry. In April, the first 24 students gradu ated from an 8-month cannabis production  
of the crop dry out at different rates, which leads  to the spread of pathogenic agents and root rot,  and to an inconsistent product. But the tomato  industry, for example, has experience of grow 
ing tens to hundreds of hectares of produce at a  time, and that expertise can be transferred easily  to cannabis growers, says Zheng. 
“Cannabis is just another crop,” he says.  “The commercial flower and vegetable indus tries have been working on the same problems  for many years, and they have the technology  already.” 
But other issues are unique to cannabis  production. And achieving the most efficient  production requires growers to do research  under controlled conditions to under 
stand how both plant genetics and growing  conditions can affect the product. 
Zheng’s laboratory is one of many that are  
you would see in any manufacturing facility,  whether it was producing food or tyres,” he says. The large-scale, controlled environment  enables Organigram to conduct systematic,  controlled trials and to produce huge amounts  of data — with 5 cycles of growth per year in  each of the growing rooms, it can generate  more than 250 generations’ worth of growing  data each year, says Purcell. The company can  use those data to determine what works best  
for the plants, and then replicate those condi tions at scale. “That’s the big difference with  the black market,” he says. “When you scale  
up, you have to take a data-driven approach.” To run these advanced facilities, cannabis  companies need researchers who are experi enced in plant science, microbiology, chemis try and other scientific disciplines — and they  are turning to academia to find them. “Instead  
course at Niagara College Canada in Niagara on-the-Lake. That course, intended for stu dents who already have a diploma or degree  in plant science, focuses on how to grow can nabis and the surrounding regulations. Bill  MacDonald, a plant scientist and the pro gramme’s coordinator, says that the graduates  were snapped up by industry. 
TESTING, TESTING 
Besides the challenges of growing a sufficient  amount of high-quality cannabis for a rapidly  growing market, cannabis companies have to  deal with something that illegal growers do  not — government regulation. 
“For a product to be sold in most US states, it  has to be tested externally,” says Jahan Marcu,  director of experimental pharmacology  and behavioral research at the International  
S10 | NATURE | VOL 572 | 29 AUGUST 2019 
© 2 0 1 9 S p ri n g e r N a t u r e Li mit e d. All ri g h t s r e s e r v e d. 
Research Center on Cannabis and Mental  Health in New York City. 
In Canada, government regulations require  producers to use an independent lab to meas ure the level of cannabinoid in dried cannabis  flowers and oils so that the resulting products  can be labelled appropriately. Producers must  also test for contaminants such as the bacte rium Escherichia coli, mould, heavy metals  and 96 types of pesticide. When edible canna bis products become legal in Canada later this  year, they will face similarly stringent rules,  says Purcell; labels on such products will have  to convey the same nutritional information  as do those on any other food product. In the  United States, the regulations are broadly simi lar to those in Canada. But each US state where  medical or recreational cannabis is legal sets its  own testing regime — and those requirements  can vary widely and change quickly. “In Dela ware, the regulations are now totally different  than two years ago,” says Marcu. 
Independent testing labs have sprung up to  help growers to meet the requirements, but  like the wider cannabis industry, they face  growing pains. “At the moment it’s a bit like  the Wild West, with different rules in different  places,” says Andrew James, marketing director  of Ellutia in Ely, UK, which makes chemical  analysis equipment for the cannabis industry,  among other markets. “It can be hard to know  what to test for, how to test and where to do it.” 
A commercial  
medical-cannabis  
cultivation facility  
in Moncton,  
Canada. 
In the United Kingdom, for example, strict  rules concerning THC levels in medical can nabis mean that labs can find it difficult to get  the sample analytical standards that they need  for comparing products. The licences required  to handle the standards are the same as those  needed by a lab doing research on the drug  itself. “It’s ludicrous that analytical standards  are so tightly controlled,” says James. “The can 
nabis products are treated the same as a kilo  of cocaine.” 
And not all analytical labs are up to the  job. Roger Brauninger, biosafety programme  manager at the American Association for  Laboratory Accreditation (A2LA), a non 
profit organization in Frederick, Maryland,  says that although US states introduced  requirements for external testing as medical  or recreational cannabis became legalized,  there was rarely any infrastructure or exper 
tise in place to facilitate a professional testing  regime. Even the most established labs, located  in California, have only been around since the  mid-2000s — despite the state legalizing the  medical use of cannabis in 1996. 
“Because of the federal strictures, there  weren’t any standardized methods. Labs had  to validate everything themselves,” Brauninger  says. “It’s difficult to bring in expertise when  there isn’t a wealth of information available, and  no trade association to help share techniques.” 
That led to labs being set up quickly with  
CANNABIS OUTLOOK 
old equipment in unsuitable spaces, and with  minimal quality control. James says that, in the  past, it was not uncommon to meet people at  trade shows who had bought analytical kits on  the online auction site eBay and were running  testing labs from their bedrooms. 
Cannabis analytical labs are becoming  more professional. “I’ve seen an evolution in  the sophistication of the industry,” Brauninger  says. “Most of the people running labs now  have PhDs and experience in the pharmaceuti 
cal industry. It’s light years more sophisticated  than five or six years ago.” 
Such labs are beginning to adopt standard ized tests for potency and purity using gas  chromatography and high-performance liq uid chromatography. They are also developing  methods to identify and measure levels of THC  and other cannabinoids, as well as contami nants such as heavy metals and pesticide resi dues. “These aren’t necessarily new tests that  have been created for this industry, but the type  that had to be applied for this product,” says  Brauninger. 
A2LA is also helping labs to attain  ISO/IEC 17025 accreditation, the main inter national standard for testing and calibration  labs. It covers all phases of lab operation,  including staff training, data protection and  dealing with conflicts of interest. 
Although many small-scale cannabis  growers at first questioned the need for inten sive product testing, most can now appreciate  the benefits that the rules bring to the market.  “People see the need for quality control and  testing,” says James. “It brings a legitimacy to  the industry that hasn’t always been there.” 
And as testing becomes more widespread, its  importance is also reaching users, says Marcu.  “Consumers are starting to realize that there is  a big difference between illicit or grey-market  products and those from a licensed operator,”  he says. “They can have more confidence in the  products than before.” 
One sign of progress is that cannabis  products can be recalled when they fail test ing, just like other medical or consumer  items. In December 2016 and January 2017,  Organigram had to recall some of its products  when residues from pesticides not approved  for use in cannabis were detected. Although  the company’s reputation took a short-term  hit, Purcell says that recalls are a sign of the  industry’s growing professionalism. Consum 
ers can be confident that cannabis goods have  been made “under a controlled, regulated  environment and tested in a certified lab that  guarantees safety and quality”. 
As the cannabis industry expands, the role  of good science within it will also expand, and  there will be further opportunities for col laboration. “More and more,” says Zheng, “the  scientific community and industry are directly  communicating and sharing information.” ■ 
Brian Owens is a freelance journalist in  St Stephen, New Brunswick, Canada. 
© 2 0 1 9 S p ri n g e r N a t u r e Li mit e d. Al l ri g h t s r e s e r v e d.
29 AUGUST 2019 | VOL 572 | NATURE | S11