Text copyright © 2021 by Penny Barthel 
Photographs copyright © 2021 by Erin Scott 
All rights reserved. 
Published in the United States by Ten Speed Press, an imprint of Random House, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York. 
www.tenspeed.com 
Ten Speed Press and the Ten Speed Press colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Names: Barthel, Penny, 1965– author. 
Title: The cannabis gardener : a beginner’s guide to growing vibrant, healthy plants in every region / Penny Barthel. 
Description: First edition. | [Emeryville], California : Ten Speed Press, [2121] | Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2020020080 (print) | LCCN 2020020081 (ebook) | ISBN 9781984858849 (hardcover) | ISBN 9781984858856 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Cannabis. | Gardening. | Cannabis—Seedlings—Growth. Classification: LCC SB295.C35 B37 2021 (print) | LCC SB295.C35 (ebook) | DDC 633.7/9—dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020020080 
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020020081 
Hardcover ISBN 9781984858849 
Ebook ISBN 9781984858856 
Editor: Kim Keller 
Designer: Lisa Schneller Bieser 
Art director: Emma Campion 
Production designer: Mari Gill 
Production manager: Dan Myers 
Food & botanicals stylist: Lillian Kang 
Prop stylist: Erin Scott 
Photo assistant and model: Nicola Parisi 
Copyeditor: Dolores York 
Proofreader: Kathy Brock 
Indexer: Ken DellaPenta 
Publicist: Natalie Yera 
Marketer: Andrea Portanova 
rhid_prh_5.6.1_c0_r0
Contents 
Introduction 
CHAPTER 1 
Choosing the Right Cannabis for You and Your Garden 
CHAPTER 2 
Designing Your Garden Space with Cannabis 
CHAPTER 3 
e Four Elements: Sun, Soil, Airow, and Water 
CHAPTER 4 
e Vegetative Stage: From Seed to Teen 
CHAPTER 5 
e Flowering Stage: From Blossom to Bud 
CHAPTER 6 
Harvest Preparation: Ideas for Harvest, Setting Up Your Drying Space, and Evaluating Ripeness 
CHAPTER 7 
Time to Harvest: Picking,Trimming, Drying, Curing, and Storing Your Grow 
CHAPTER 8 
Savoring Your Grow: Tincture, Concentrate, Cannabutter, and Tisane with Key Recipes
Glossary 
Sources 
Acknowledgments Index
Introduction 
Cannabis is one of humanity’s most useful plants.It is also one of the most notorious and misunderstood plants of all time.It is at once a durable ber, nourishing food, a health aid, a euphoriant, a social lubricant.It is also— according to US federal law—a schedule 1 drug, meaning that it is considered to be a substance of the highest danger and lowest value to humanity.Is cannabis really all of these things at once? Yes, it is. But we are in a new era, both in the United States and globally. 
State by state, cannabis is being legalized, and the pressure is building to de schedule this gift of nature and create a sane and wholesome appreciation for the potential that this plant can bring to the world. And best of all? It’s really fun to grow in the garden.With a planter, some soil, a cannabis seed, and a spot in the sun, anyone can grow healthy cannabis.I believe that everyone should have access to the gifts of physical, emotional, and spiritual health that cannabis offers to humanity. 
I live in California, where cannabis possession and consumption is legal statewide and cultivation is broadly permitted for personal use. Cannabis regulation is constantly changing, making it important for citizens to stay up to date with the latest information. (NORML.org is an excellent resource for remaining informed.) is recent freedom for weed enthusiasts is not by chance, though.It is the outcome of many hard-won victories by cannabis growers and activists.We owe a debt to people like Dennis Peron and Mary Jane Rathbun, who fought and sacriced to bring this healing plant out of the prohibition era and into the legal post–prohibition era. Northern California has been the literal seedbed of cannabis innovation and hybridization for the past several decades.I am so grateful for the work of the cannabis warriors who paid dearly for my gardening freedom. But there is still work to be done. Let’s be clear:e war on drugs is rooted in racism
and white supremacy.Too many people linger in prison from minor cannabis convictions, and these people are disproportionately people of color. Even after they have served their time, their convictions linger over them, making it difficult to obtain employment or regain the right to vote.I encourage each of us to put our voices and votes toward record expungement and cannabis de-scheduling and legalization on a national level. Let’s all support our local BIPOC and equity cannabis businesses and give those who’ve paid an unfair price some space to grow in the new cannabis economy. 
To celebrate the new post–prohibition era, consider planting your own cannabis victory garden.ere is so much great weed to enjoy, grow, and learn from.Its resins contain unique molecules that are active in just about every cell in the human body—indeed in every mammal’s body.ankfully, cannabis is an undemanding plant in the garden.It grows just about anywhere and completes its entire life in under a year.e cannabis gardener is free to explore the abundance that this plant offers without the constraints of needing to turn a prot—that’s the work of the cannabis farmer.We gardeners have freedom to experiment with different cultivars and growing techniques because we’re our own clients.We can make mistakes without the fear of nancial ruin.I think the best part of growing my own weed is how much joy it brings me. From a small green-gray seed 
rmly rooted in my own soil comes a magnicent 10-foot-tall beauty, covered with richly scented, sparkly ower buds. And from these ower buds, sticky with resins,I get to craft tinctures, salves, and edibles that keep me feeling great throughout the year.I invite you to join me in an adventure of connection and become a cannabis gardener.
CHAPTER 1 
Choosing the Right 
Cannabis for You and Your Garden
  

  

Cannabis is one of the world’s most useful 
plant groups.It has been a part of human 
culture for thousands of years beginning in 
Eurasia, and today it is associated with 
people in almost all parts of the world. 
—ROBERT C. CLARKE AND MARK D. 
MERLIN, Cannabis Evolution and 
Ethnobotany 
  

CANNABIS—THE PLANT 
Growing up in suburban California, I first heard about cannabis while I was in junior high. Televised antidrug ads blasted, “This is your brain. This is your brain on drugs,” while showing an egg frying in a hot pan (and that image will forever linger in my psyche). Cheech and Chong provided my main information on cannabis, since I was raised smack-dab in the middle of the war on drugs. Currently the word weed has surfaced, and I’ve also heard it called many different names, some of them reflective of the form that the harvested plant product takes, such as, hashish. Other names come from local slang, such as pakalōlō in Hawaii. Ganja, grass, maryjane, doobie—there are all sorts of slang terms for cannabis and the things made from it. Some of these terms are enduring and ancient; others have popped up quite recently. 
While this plant has many nicknames, its commonly used scientific name is Cannabis sativa—for now, at least. The influential Swedish taxonomist Carolus Linnaeus provided this name for the scientific
community in his book Species Plantarum in 1753. Like many botanical names, the name Cannabis sativa has been bandied about by the scientific community for hundreds of years. As an understanding of plant origins changes, scientists sometimes radically adjust how to classify, and thus name, particular plants. Cannabis has at different times been classified as one, two, or three separate species. You may have heard the terms indica and sativa offered as different species of cannabis. These same two terms are used in another way: to describe certain effects by type of cannabis. A third group, ruderalis, is well known to cannabis breeders—especially those interested in breeding auto-flowering plants. 
I think it’s quite illuminating that we use the name sativa for the species name of this plant. The term sativa in botanical nomenclature refers to any useful, health-promoting cultivated plant—precisely what cannabis is. For this book, I will use the terms cannabis and weed interchangeably. But whichever name is used, I believe cannabis is a plant of connection. It helps us connect to ourselves, to each other, and to the natural world. Cannabis gardeners have the special joy of being invited into the whole life of this plant while being outside, in the sun, and part of a natural process. 
THE HUMAN HISTORY OF 
CANNABIS 
People have used cannabis for a very long time—for fiber, food, medicine, and mood enhancement. Cannabis has also been used in religious rituals for at least twenty-five thousand years and has been cultivated commercially for six thousand years. While
cannabis does grow in the wild, it is difficult to separate the truly wild-type cannabis groups from those that humans have influenced. Researchers aren’t even sure of what cannabis was first used for. It may have been for fiber, spiritual use, or for the mood enhancing qualities of inhaled smoke. What we do know is that people have enjoyed and benefitted from cannabis for millennia. 
Cannabis likely originated in the wild in central Asia. This ancient plant grew best in areas with abundant sunshine, nitrogen-rich soil, consistent summer moisture, and pronounced seasonal daylight changes. Interestingly, cannabis grows really well in conditions also attractive to humans—near bodies of freshwater with rich soil. As soon as people discovered cannabis, they began changing it to suit their needs. And the cannabis plant responded generously to those demands. Cannabis is quite plastic in its ability to adapt to selective breeding. That is why some varieties of the plant grow stick straight and tall, with long fibrous stalks, while others grow short and dense with richly scented, sticky flowers. 
As people ventured to other lands, they brought cannabis seeds with them. Cannabis seeds don’t spread easily by themselves, but when humans figured out how useful this plant was, they gathered the seeds of their favorite plants to grow when they moved to a new place. Cannabis adapted to new climates easily, creating stable breeding populations with unique characteristics. Some cultures favored certain uses for the cannabis plant. Japan and Korea prized cannabis as a fiber for cloth, selecting cannabis that grew lanky with long leaf internodes (areas of stem between leaves). Other groups used cannabis as medicine and chose plants fragrant with sticky resin. During the age of expansion, as traders moved across vast oceans, they, too, brought cannabis to new
lands. As a result, we find stable cannabis populations with widely varied traits in different areas around the globe. Known as landraces, these plants aren’t wild, since they were originally distributed by people, but they are better understood as being feral plants. Some famous landraces are Hindu Kush from the Afghan/Pakistan region, Acapulco Gold from Mexico, Durban Poison from Africa, Thai from Southeast Asia, and Colombian Gold from Central America. If you hear someone telling you they are growing true wild-type weed, it’s likely not true. That’s not to say that their cannabis isn’t amazing; it’s just that cannabis is so adaptable to human influence that it’s a challenge to keep a population truly wild and unaffected by people. 
Landraces are stable, naturally growing cannabis that populate different places in the world.ey are a product of human inuence, but grow on their own in nature.ey are rather like the wild parrots of Telegraph Hill in San Francisco, but even more regionalized. 
Today, cannabis is commercially cultivated for resin-rich flowers, seed for food and oil, fiber for cloth and rope, animal bedding, eyeglasses, car parts, building foundation materials such as hempcrete, and fuel such as hemp biodiesel. This is one versatile and helpful plant!
  

CHOOSING WHICH PLANT TO 
GROW 
Before you plant your first cannabis, there are two big decisions to make. The first question to ask yourself is “What do I want from my cannabis harvest?” The second question is “What cannabis cultivars will grow well in my garden?” Let’s explore these two questions. 
What do I want from my cannabis harvest? Why am I growing this plant? I ask you to pause and consider your hopes for your grow— because this will be key information as you seek out the best cannabis match for you. A wide variety of cannabis seeds and clones are available to the home grower—and there’s more variety available with each passing year. And as recent discoveries unlock some of the mystery of this plant, the way to choose what cannabis to grow is changing dramatically. Rather than relying on anecdotal evidence about the potency and impact of a cultivar, today’s growers have access to concrete biochemical information to guide their choices. 
As you think first about what you want from your grow, take a minute to jot down some of your hopes. Perhaps you’re looking for some awesome dank bud to enjoy at the end of the day—and are after a huge sparkly cola. Maybe you’re interested in managing the pain of arthritis. If you’re a curious gardener, like me, then it could be that you’re always on the hunt for a cool new plant to try in your soil. One of the reasons a friend of mine grew her first cannabis plant was to support a friend of hers who was battling cancer and benefitted from smoking weed but couldn’t afford to buy much at the dispensary. (Plus—let’s be honest—she wanted some for herself.) Whatever your reasons, know that cannabis is an expressive plant
and offers us humans a wide array of benefits: health support, mood enhancement, and lush beauty for the garden. 
One of the reasons I grow cannabis is to support my health. I—like many people—get aches and pains from working out, have emerging osteoarthritis, occasional migraines, and am a sensitive sleeper. Oh—and I have reactive skin and rosacea, too. Guess what? Cannabis is helpful for all those things. Being an inquisitive person, I like to go deep when I learn, so I wondered about how cannabis could help with this wide array of issues. Frankly, I was a little skeptical when I overheard conversations or read about the extraordinary claims being made about the helpfulness of cannabis for human health. I wondered how one plant could provide relief for such a wide variety of health problems. It was tempting to shut my mind to the claims, but I resisted the temptation and decided to dig in instead. What a good decision that was and continues to be. Hang on, dear reader—there is a large and important body of studies emerging, and that is very good news for us all. The way cannabis works in the body is both fascinating and hope giving. My own understanding of the science has also increased my confidence in selecting cannabis to improve my health and well-being. Throughout this book, I’ll share some of what I’ve learned about how cannabis impacts human health and
offer guidance to help you make the best cannabis plant match for both your body’s and your garden’s needs. 
  

THE ENDOCANNABINOID 
SYSTEM 
We are a part of nature—we all know this. But our modern human built environments can sometimes fool us into forgetting our creatureliness. When we grow, cultivate, harvest, and use our own cannabis, we are reminded of our place in the natural world. As we share a joint or offer a friend some of our homemade cannabis tincture, we are connecting to other people. Our collective human experiences inform us that this plant is—and has been for millennia —at work in us for the better. But just how and why cannabis impacts us has been a mystery until rather recently. Today, we are witnessing a new era in cannabis history.
You may be familiar with systems in the human body—including the circulatory, skeletal, lymph, respiratory, nervous, digestive, and muscular systems. You probably learned about these in science class. People have been studying them for hundreds of years. And yet, very recently, a new body system was discovered and named. This system is everywhere in the human body, in all vertebrates— any animal that has a spine—in fact. This system is perhaps the most widely distributed system in our entire body, but until very recently, we knew nothing about it. It’s called the endocannabinoid system (ECS) and is often referred to as the “bridge between mind and body.” We are beginning to understand the ECS as the master system, the one what governs all the other systems. Amazing! Through the discovery of the ECS, we are exploring the ways in which cannabis helps our bodies and minds work better. 
First, a little history. In a US government–funded study at the St. Louis University School of Medicine in 1988, two scientists identified receptors for compounds found in cannabis—and they found that these particular types of receptors were more prevalent than any other neuroreceptor in the body. This staggeringly significant discovery illuminated a hidden world of activity in the body that has broad significance for our health and well-being. Further studies revealed that there are two endocannabinoid receptors, named CB1 and CB2. Scientists were stunned to learn that CB1 receptors were the single most abundant receptor in the brain. The discovery of the chemicals that affected these two receptors—namely cannabinoids—was a watershed moment for the global scientific community. 
A cannabinoid is a substance that affects the ECS. Our bodies make cannabinoids—called endocannabinoids. The two
endocannabinoids identified so far are anandamide (AEA), and 2- arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG). Our bodies are in fact constantly making cannabinoids to regulate all sorts of processes to keep us in homeostasis—a balanced state of consistent well-being. Cannabis plants also make cannabinoids—called 
phytocannabinoids. The cannabis plant isn’t making these substances for us but for its own uses. I refer to cannabinoids generally in this book, rather than distinguishing between endocannabinoids and phytocannabinoids. However they come to us, either made in the body or ingested from the cannabis plant, they have a profound impact on our health and mood.
  

CANNABIS AND HUMAN HEALTH 
The ECS is the most pervasive system in our bodies, and its function—broadly explained—is to keep the body in a steady state of health. This master system is involved in supporting a wide array of physiological and mental processes, including fertility, pregnancy, appetite, pain sensation, mood, and memory. One detail about the ECS that is particularly interesting is that it is vital for the proper, healthy functioning of our immune system. 
  

Current cannabis medical research is exciting and helpful for the future of human disease treatment and prevention. In a landmark 2013 National Institutes of Health study entitled “Modulating the Endocannabinoid System in Human Health and Disease,” Drs. Pál 
Pacher and George Kunos stated that “modulating ECS activity may have therapeutic potential in almost all diseases affecting humans.” According to this study, almost all human diseases are impacted by
the ECS, and the cannabinoids and terpenes found in cannabis directly support the ECS. Putting this together, cannabis use may have an impact on nearly all diseases affecting humans. This sweeping statement offers support for the importance of cannabis in human health. Along with its newfound health benefits and its place in safe recreational use, it is ever more appealing for gardeners to grow their own weed and feel better about consuming it. 
Growing up in the United States and being educated in public schools have made me a typical post-enlightenment, individualistic, science-trusting person. I have a strong inclination toward Western medicine, both because it’s powerful and because this is the culture in which I was raised. And yet, I recognize that it has significant blind spots. Western medicine is great at treating disease but less interested in health support. Our doctors encourage us to be vaccinated, eat good food, and get some exercise, but they often don’t suggest much else regarding disease prevention. This leaves an opening for other medicine traditions, including herbal medicine and cannabis that gently and safely offer support to our health. And while we are only at the beginning of understanding how and why cannabinoids impact our lives, we have literally thousands of years’ worth of anecdotal evidence to support the safety, relief, and pleasure that this plant brings us. 
CANNABINOIDS, TERPENES, AND 
THE ENTOURAGE EFFECT 
So, how does this new understanding of the ECS help guide which cannabis plant will be best for our bodies? It helps us figure out which cannabinoids will most likely support our health goals; this in
turn will narrow our choice of cultivars. Let’s take a look at cannabinoids, terpenes, and the entourage effect. 
Cannabinoids 
Cannabinoids are a large group of natural compounds made by your body (endocannabinoids) and also made by the cannabis plant (phytocannabinoids). They interact in complex ways with specific receptors in the body and brain, either switching them on or off or momentarily changing the way the receptors work. They work gently, offering support to the body’s natural health maintenance. While a cannabis plant manufactures hundreds of cannabinoids, most are found only in tiny amounts. It’s helpful to have a basic working vocabulary of the major cannabinoids to help guide your choice of cannabis plants and products. The two most common cannabinoids found in cannabis are THC and CBD. 
THC. The most famous cannabinoid is THC, or delta-9- tetrahydrocannabinol, which produces strong mood and health effects. THC is the molecule most responsible for the feelings of euphoria—the “high”—that nearly all of us feel when consuming enough cannabis. By volume, THC is the most abundant cannabinoid in weed grown for resin-rich flower buds. THC works as an anti-inflammatory and pain killer, improves appetite, and has potent psychotropic effects. Taken in large quantity, THC can cause a powerful, sometimes unsettling, psychedelic experience. 
While THC is active in both the CB1 and CB2 receptors, its influence on CB1 receptors is of the most interest to patients and recreational users alike. CB1 receptors are abundant in the brain and central nervous system. One part of the brain where there are no CB1 receptors is in the brain stem, the part of the brain
responsible for respiration and circulation. This is primary reason why cannabis overdoses do not cause death. For some folks, THC acts to calm racing thoughts, relaxing the mental tension that we occasionally experience. This same reaction can be perceived by 
some as hypersensitivity to surroundings, or paranoia. Some of us become loquacious, some get sleepy, many get hungry (aka get the “munchies”). And even if we take too much THC (Hit that bong way too hard! Ate the whole brownie!) and have a stronger-than intended experience, we will recover in several hours to a day. Very few people have ever died directly of cannabis overconsumption. That said, those who are sensitive to psychotropic medicines or who have schizoaffective disorder should be cautious when consuming THC and proceed with tiny doses. A helpful reminder from the medical cannabis community is “low and slow”; keep your dose low and let the impact fully resolve before consuming more. THC starts out as THCa in the cannabis plant. THCa is simply the THC molecule with a small carboxyl group (a carbon atom with two oxygen atoms and one hydrogen atom) attached to it. There is little to no THC in raw, freshly harvested cannabis bud, only THCa. 
CBD. The second most abundant cannabinoid is CBD, or cannabidiol. This cannabinoid is everywhere in the news lately—and for good reason. Taken alone, CBD is broadly effective in the body and does not produce intoxicating effects, even at high doses. That doesn’t mean it isn’t psychoactive—it is! But CBD’s effects on the brain, and thus our perception of reality, are mild and non psychedelic. Most people feel calmed after consuming CBD. CBD also is well established as an anti-seizure medicine and relieves anxiety. It can even be used as a tool to reduce an uncomfortable high if one ingests too much THC. CBD is also anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial, anti-psychotic, and pain-killing—and this is just CBD
alone. When CBD gets together with THC and other cannabinoids, its impacts are altered—usually for the better. 
CBD is legal in all parts of the United States except Idaho, Iowa, and South Dakota—sold without a prescription in many drugstores and frequently added to cosmetics, coffee, and soft drinks. So why is this particular cannabinoid sold without a prescription in so many places, whereas cannabis flower is still federally a schedule 1 drug? There are a couple of reasons. The first is that CBD can be derived from hemp. Botanically, hemp and cannabis are one and the same. Legally, they are different. The legal definition of hemp is cannabis that contains less than 0.3 percent by dry weight of THC. The 2018 US farm bill made hemp growing legal, and hemp contains enough CBD that commercial isolation of this molecule from the plant has become a big business. But technically speaking, while hemp is legal, concentrated CBD isn’t. If you get your CBD from cannabis, it’s still illegal! Same molecule, same species, but one is legal, and the other is not. This is the confusing nonsense that will hopefully soon be sorted out by legalizing and de-scheduling this plant. 
Other cannabinoids. While you may have heard about THC and CBD before reading this book, you may be less familiar with the hundreds—you heard that right—of other cannabinoids. As we tumble out of prohibition, there has been a burst of activity to study the various cannabinoids found in weed. It seems that every day brings new insights into the different impacts of cannabis on our bodies. Here are a few of the better understood cannabinoids and how they may impact you. 
THCa. This is the THC molecule as it’s found in the fresh leaf or bud. This cannabinoid is not going to make you high. But it very
well may help out with inflammation and pain management. When you whip up a tincture with fresh bud (see this page), you can access this helpful cannabinoid. 
CBDa. This is the CBD molecule as it’s found in the fresh leaf or bud. CBDa has been studied for about a decade and is showing promise for treating inflammation—but in a different way entirely from CBD. It’s also showing promise as an anti-convulsant. 
CBN. Cannabinol, or CBN, is what THCa eventually turns into given enough time. Cannabis flower continues to change slowly after it is harvested: THCa turns into CBNa, which turns into CBN. Heat, light, oxygen, and time are the four most important factors that influence this natural biochemical process. CBN is known for its sedative, 
soporific effect, which is sometimes referred to as couchlock. 
CBG. Cannibigerol, or CBG, is the mother cannabinoid. In the plant, it begins as CBGa and all the other cannabinoids are derived from this one. There is nothing we can do to transform CBG into other cannabinoids—the cannabis plant has to do this. Some breeders are selecting cultivars that retain CBG in their mature flowers, since this cannabinoid is showing medical promise for treating pain, muscle disorders, inflammation, skin disorders, perhaps even depression and cancer. As with most things in the cannabis realm, studies are in progress on CBG. This is an emerging cannabinoid in the supplement market. 
CBC. Cannabichromene, or CBC, starts as CBCa in the plant and is a potent, non-intoxicating cannabinoid that has shown the potential to treat pain and inflammation, is neuroprotective, is helpful in treating acne, and may even alleviate depression.
And this is just the tip of the cannabinoid iceberg. There are many cannabinoids found in cannabis preparations, most of them in tiny quantities. Each cultivar of cannabis has its own particular set of cannabinoids and terpenes that interact with each other and our bodies in unique ways. 
Terpenes and the Entourage Effect 
In addition to cannabinoids, there is another important group of molecules to explore: terpenes. You’ve experienced terpenes, even if you’ve never heard this word before, because you can smell them. Whereas cannabinoids are found primarily in cannabis, terpenes are common in many plants. Cannabis is notoriously fragrant, and terpenes are to blame. Terpenes are important players in how the cannabinoids behave in our bodies. Terpenes are the reason why two cannabis varieties, with nearly identical cannabinoid profiles but varying fragrances or terpene profiles, can affect our bodies differently. This is called the entourage effect, a term coined by Dr. Raphael Mechoulam, who is considered the grandfather of cannabis research. He used the term “entourage effect” to describe the synergistic effects of cannabinoids and terpenes as they work together in our bodies. Terpenes impact health, even when used in isolation. When terpenes are consumed with cannabinoids, they interact in our bodies in new ways. Nature has a way of creating symbiosis, and that is true of the hundreds of biologically active molecules found in cannabis.
  

  

THE COMPLEXITY OF CANNABIS 
IN THE BODY 
At a recent lecture called “Pleasure, Poison, Prescription, Prayer: The Worlds of Mind-Altering Substances” at the University of California, Berkeley, Dr. David Presti presented “Cannabis Neurobiology: More Complex than Black-Hole Astrophysics.” Dr. Presti began his scientific career by studying astrophysics, then switched to molecular biology and biophysics. In his lecture he explained how cannabis works in the brain and body and its relative complexity. To help his audience gain perspective on just how different cannabis is from many other intoxicants, he ticked off a brief explanation of different ones, such as alcohol, caffeine, opium, and nicotine, and their neurologic impacts. For all of these, it was one active molecule and one specific receptor. But when he got to cannabis, the data set changed radically. By contrast, cannabis contains hundreds of distinct molecules that impact receptors found abundantly in the body. Dr. Presti made the bold claim that while he believes future researchers will uncover some of the ways in which cannabis works in the body, we will never know the whole story—it’s just too complex, calling it “non computable,” or too complex to fully compute. This is a challenging story to our Western, reductionist mindset for sure. He offered a final thought—a closing benediction. He encouraged us to “just get to know this plant.” In other words, don’t let the enormous complexity of cannabis’s impact on the body be a stumbling block to experimentation. 
Let’s make some sense of this complexity and narrow in on some good choices for your body. Start by asking yourself, “What do I
want from my cannabis harvest?” “Why am I growing this plant?” For many of us, we’re looking for a particular impact, often due to health issues. New weed hybrids are constantly being introduced, as breeders refine and concentrate their genetics. Most of the cultivars found today in dispensaries, or in the illicit market, are going to be THC-dominant. The medical cannabis community has historically had more interest a balanced THC:CBD cannabinoid profile. Don’t get too invested in finding the perfect cultivar. If you focus on the general type of cannabis in terms of cannabinoids and terpenes, you’re going to be close to getting what you need. How you respond is perhaps the most important information of all in selecting a great type of cannabis to grow. The table on this page outlines several common health concerns with suggestions for cannabinoids and terpenes to treat those concerns, along with some cultivar suggestions. 
  
The Power of Cannabis 
ere are myriad health reasons to grow and consume cannabis. Remembering that the endocannabinoid system is considered the master regulatory system in the body, creating homeostasis in all the other bodily systems, there are likely health impacts for a large number of health concerns.I recommend Cannabis Pharmacy and Cannabis & CBD for Health & Wellness as two good books to help you explore your particular health condition and how cannabis can benet you.ere are excellent resources online as well.“Nurse Susan”is a free app that is simple to use. Nurse Susan is a registered cannabis nurse who offers sound advice on how to choose helpful cannabis varieties.

KNOWING WHICH PLANT IS 
RIGHT FOR YOU 
Until recently, cannabis users used the terms sativa and indica to describe the particular effects one could expect from these respective types of cannabis. Although sativa is the species name of the genus Cannabis, it is widely accepted that there are three subspecies: sativa sativa, sativa indica, and sativa ruderalis—the subspecies important for breeders of auto-flowering cultivars only. (Auto-flowers are an emerging hybrid-type cannabis that does well in short growing seasons.) The story was that sativa-dominant weed —meaning those tall, thin-leaved, late-maturing plants that look like cannabis plants from tropical areas with their hot summers and long growing seasons—produced a heady high, a creative inclination, or an energizing experience. Conversely, indica dominant cannabis is from the areas of central Asia and eastern Europe with their cooler summers and shorter growing seasons. Indica-leaning hybrids are said to give a relaxed high, with a sense of peaceful euphoria. Some people persist in using these terms to describe composed cannabis products for sale in dispensaries, even when these products have nothing to do with a particular
cultivar’s botanical origins. Sativa became an adjective for energetic highs, and indica became a shorthand for relaxing highs. 

Recently, especially with the use of scientific analysis of each plant’s cannabinoid and terpene profile, these terms have fallen out of fashion as surprising new information has come to light. As states have legalized cannabis, they have also mandated testing for potency and safety. The tests mandated by most states require analysis of all cannabinoids and terpenes present, total THC, and total CBD in a sample. This information has dramatically changed the expectations of growers and users alike. It turns out that the effect that can be expected from any particular cultivar is much more closely related to the cannabinoid and terpene profile than the appearance or geographical origin of the plant. So even if two
plants look different in the garden, if their cannabinoid and terpene profiles are close, then the effect on the body and mind will be, too. Conversely, if two plants look similar but their cannabinoid and terpene profiles are different, they will affect you differently. The cannabis community is scrambling to craft new descriptors for different cultivars of cannabis, and there are some helpful new ways of describing what any cultivar offers. The website Leafly released a cannabis guide that simply and graphically explains how a cultivar will likely affect you once ingested. I will not be using sativa and indica as shorthand descriptors for what to expect in your bud. I will, however, use these terms to describe the look and growth habits of certain cultivars, since these terms are common in cannabis seed catalogs. To describe what sort of body and mind impact to expect from cultivars, I lean on terpene content and cannabinoid ratios— especially CBD to THC ratios.
Common Health Concerns and Treatments 
HEALTH CONCERN 
CANNABINOIDS TERPENES (+ SCENT PROFILE) 
Myrcene 
(spice/mango), 
Linalool 
CULTIVAR 
SUGGESTIONS 
Purple Urkle, Granddaddy Purple,Tahoe 
SleepTHC, CBN, CBD 
(oral/warm/lavender), Caryophyllene 
(spice/woody/black pepper) 
OG Kush, Purple Kush, God’s Gift, Northern Lights, 
Ogre, 9 Pound Hammer, Remedy 
NOTES For many, sleep is a big motivator for consuming cannabis. Choose a cultivar that is rich in THC and smells “purple” or woody and fruity.If you are very sensitive to THC or tend to react to THC with feelings of anxiety, look for a high-CBD variety with the terpene prole listed above. Remedy is a good CBD cultivar with soporic terpenes. Old CBN-rich bud may be a helpful sleep aid. 
HEALTH CONCERN 
CANNABINOIDS TERPENES (+ SCENT PROFILE) 
Myrcene 
(spice/mango), Pinene 
CULTIVAR 
SUGGESTIONS 
Pennywise 1:1, Harlequin, Sweet 
Pain1:1 THC to CBD 
(resinous/pine), 
Geraniol (oral/rose), Linalool 
(oral/warm/lavender) 
Annie 1:1, 
Cannatonic, 
Dancehall, 
Argyle, Sweet and Sour Widow 
NOTES e gold standard for treating pain is a balanced THC:CBD prole.is is the ratio that natural landrace cannabis provides.
HEALTH CONCERN 
CANNABINOIDS TERPENES (+ SCENT PROFILE) 
CULTIVAR 
SUGGESTIONS 
During prohibition, breeders upped the THC expression while ignoring CBD. Luckily, many breeders are now offering cultivars with a balanced THC:CBD expression. For nerve pain, look for more THC. For inammatory pain, look for more CBD. 
HEALTH CONCERN 
CANNABINOIDS TERPENES (+ SCENT PROFILE) 
Caryophyllene 
(spice/woody/black 
pepper), Myrcene 
CULTIVAR 
SUGGESTIONS 
High THC: choose from hundreds of cultivars. 
High CBD: e Wife, 
Willy G’s 
Lebanese, 
ACDC, 
Inammation 
THCa, 
CBDa, CBG, CBD,THC 
(spice/mango), 
Linalool 
(oral/warm/lavender) , Caryophyllene 
(spice/woody/black pepper) 
Medihaze, CBD Critical Mass, 
Cannatonic, Royal 
Highness, 
Pennywise, CBD Blue Shark. High CBG: Magic Jordan, 
Destroyer 
NOTES For inammation, consider growing a THC-leaning cultivar and consume it raw to retain the THCa. Also
HEALTH CONCERN 
CANNABINOIDS TERPENES (+ SCENT PROFILE) 
CULTIVAR 
SUGGESTIONS 
helpful for inammation is any CBD-heavy variety. CBG rich cultivars: Magic Jordan, Panakeia,White CBG 
HEALTH CONCERN 
CANNABINOIDS TERPENES (+ SCENT PROFILE) 
Linalool 
(oral/warm/lavender), 
CULTIVAR 
SUGGESTIONS 
AnxietyCBD, CBC, CBG 
Myrcene 
(spice/mango), Caryophyllene (spice/woody/black pepper) 
Cannatonic, Canna-Tsu, Remedy 
NOTES Especially for those who are sensitive to THC, CBD can be a best friend. A small amount of THC can be a helpful part of treating anxiety for some. Look for a cultivar with all CBD or one with several times more CBD than THC. 
HEALTH CONCERN 
CANNABINOIDS TERPENES (+ SCENT PROFILE) 
CULTIVAR 
SUGGESTIONS 
Euphoria/High THC Caryophyllene (spice/woody/black 
pepper), Geraniol 
(oral/rose), 
Humulene 
(woody/earthy/hops), 
Limonene 
(bright/lemon), 
Linalool 
(oral/warm/lavender) 
, Myrcene 
Blue Dream, Sour Diesel, Tangie, 
Melon 
Magic, 
Shangri-La are just a few of the 
thousands of euphoria 
inducing
HEALTH CONCERN 
CANNABINOIDS TERPENES (+ SCENT PROFILE) 
(spice/mango), Pinene 
(resinous/pine) 
CULTIVAR 
SUGGESTIONS types you can grow. 
NOTES e sky is the limit in experimenting with cannabis to get high.In general, stick with cultivars that have high levels 
of THC relative to CBD.Terpenes will make a big 
difference in how you’re likely to feel, so let your nose 
lead the way.In general, limonene and pinene offer 
energizing, focusing effects, while linalool and myrcene 
offer a sedating impact. My personal favorite is Blue 
Dream: I feel happy and dreamy while fully awake with 
this one, and it grows like magic in my garden. 
Cannabis vs Hemp 
People have for millennia grown certain types of cannabis for particular uses: when grown for fiber and seed, it is called hemp; when grown for medicinal, mood, or spiritual uses, it is known as cannabis. Current growers are intentionally cross-breeding hemp varieties with cannabis drug varieties to create all sorts of unique cultivars. It used to be that well-grown landrace cannabis (stable, natural-growing cannabis) had a pretty consistent 10 percent expression of both CBD and THC. During prohibition, the illegal weed growers selected plants that got folks really high—exhibiting THC expression of more than 30 percent with no CBD. Meanwhile, hemp grown for fiber continued to express lower overall levels of cannabinoids, with almost no THC. 
Lucky for us, home growers and maverick illicit market growers have quietly been keeping unique, valuable cultivars of cannabis alive and growing. We should all be grateful for these brave souls, since many of them faced harsh punishments when their grows were discovered during prohibition. Current legal growers are building on this cultural
legacy by pulling cannabis genetics from both local and global sources. Every year new varieties of cannabis are released, each with unique characteristics. And with the influx of money from the legal marketplace, huge PR budgets are in play to garner the consumer’s attention and money. 
There are many cultivars of cannabis available, each type offering us something unique. Consistency in the final product is important for commercial weed growers, since their livelihoods depend on giving their customers a predictable experience. But we home cannabis growers have more flexibility and can take a risk on a new cannabis plant without breaking our budgets. We get to be explorers in our own gardens! 
Where You Live Matters 
Cannabis sativa grows in just about any climate that humans have traditionally inhabited. Cannabis is found on every continent except Antarctica, and it will grow in every state in the United States. From Hawaii to Alaska, Maine to Arizona—there is a cannabis cultivar that will grow where you live. As long you provide rich soil, lots of sun, and enough water, there is very likely going to be a cultivar that you can grow outside. That said, it is important to consider the specific climate zone you’ll be growing in to choose the best weed to plant in your outdoor growing space. I address the specific needs of your cannabis plants to grow well outside in chapters 3 and 4. In this chapter, our aim is to zoom out a bit and understand what our place on the globe is and how this narrows our choices of cannabis plants.

What’s My USDA or Sunset Garden Zone? 
Start with the climate zone you are in. There are three climate zone systems that are helpful to determine the climate you live and grow in: the global Köppen Climate Classification, the USDA climate zone and, for some of us, the Sunset Western Garden Climate Zones. I live and garden in the cool summer, mild winter climate of the Bay Area in California. As such, in the Köppen Climate Classification system, this is Csb, or Mediterranean climate. According to the USDA, I’m in Zone 10a. But since I garden in California with its huge number of microclimates, the USDA zones are not very useful. I rely mostly on the Sunset Western Garden Climate Zones, and my garden falls in zone 17 for this guide. The Sunset zones are available for the western half of the United States. For those of you living east of the Rockies, the USDA zones are helpful enough, especially when combined with information from the Köppen Climate Classification system. 
Local Climate Challenges 
Below are some common climate challenges you may face in your area and the cannabis plants that will work best for you. Weed cultivars come and go, so I focus instead on what growth characteristics to look for in a plant. I recommend sourcing seeds from local companies if possible, because they know the targeted needs of their region’s growers. Make some new friends in your local cannabis-growing community to get more specific cultivar recommendations.
CLIMATE 
CHALLENGES 
PLANT ISSUES BEST PLANT CHOICES 
Cool, moist fallPowdery mildew, bud rot 
Mold-resistant indica dominant, fast-maturing cultivars 
Hot, dry summer Mites, droughtSativa-dominant, late maturing bud Hot, humid 
summerPowdery mildewMold-resistant sativa dominant 
Small seasonal uctuations 
Lanky growth, small bud 
Sativa-dominant, auto- owering 
Short summerImmature bud at rst frost 
CHOOSING WHERE TO PLANT 
Auto-owering, fast-maturing cultivars 
The next question to consider is where in your garden you will be growing your cannabis plants. Will you be growing in a container, in a raised bed, or in the ground? (For more on the differences among these three choices, see this page.) This is helpful information to know before selecting a seed or clone, the two choices of cannabis plant starts (see this page). In general, cannabis plants grown from seed (seedlings) are larger and more vigorous than cannabis grown from clones. If you have rich, well worked garden soil, then a seedling is the best choice for maximum vigor and harvest. Another plus of growing from seed is that there are lots of varieties from which to choose, they are easily purchased online, and they carry less risk of disease transfer than clones. If you will be growing in a container, then a clone may offer
the best balance of good growth and convenience. Raised beds will accommodate either seedlings or clones. Gardeners who don’t want to deal with starting seeds will be best served by planting a clone. 
DETERMINING HOW MANY 
PLANTS TO GROW 
The last factor to consider when choosing the best cannabis for your garden is to decide how many plants to grow. First, establish two key things: (1) what is legally allowed in your area and (2) how much space do you have? 
What Are the Laws in Your State? 
Let’s consider the legality issue first. Before you grow cannabis in your garden, it’s important to find out whether or not it’s legal. Cannabis can grow in nearly every part of the world, and each country has a different set of laws that govern the possession and growing of this plant. Uruguay and Canada have both completely legalized cannabis. Several other nations—New Zealand being one of them—are poised to consider legalization in the near future. However, in the United States, this gentle herb is still federally illegal and classified as a schedule 1 drug. But 99 percent of US cannabis arrests are made under state law, so it’s important to know what your state and local laws are in addition to your country’s federal laws. Some states have legalized recreational cannabis cultivation, and some haven’t. And to make it even more confusing, even in states where it is legal to grow cannabis—such as California—there are certain restrictions that override this general statewide legality. For example, if I were to bring some of my garden-grown cannabis to a national park, a post office, a school,
onto a boat, or to an airport, it’s a potential legal problem. Why? Because these are federal lands, even if they are located within the state of California. Under Proposition 64, also known as the Adult Use of Marijuana Act, California cities can ban the home cannabis grows even if they are legally allowed by the state. 
There are commonsense age requirements in play in most states. For example, in California you have to be twenty-one or older to grow cannabis at home. If an underage person grows even one cannabis plant, this can have big consequences. I encourage you to do a little research and get to know the state and local laws where you live and garden. A good source for up-to-date information is NORML—the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws—a well-respected nonprofit cannabis legalization advocacy organization. Their website has a state-by-state map with up-to-the-minute information on the legality and growing of cannabis. There are international chapters of NORML as well, for those readers living in countries around our beautiful globe. For those of you who are cannabis-loving people living in a culture or country different from the one in which you were raised, be mindful of the local social norms and laws regarding cannabis cultivation and use. 
In my garden… 
is past season I grew ve plants total—two in 20-gallon grow pots and three in the ground. My hope was to get a wide variety of health effects from my grow.I grew two Abacus plants 
because I wanted a CBD-only variety—plus, someone had given me seeds.I grew Pennywise 1:1 because it is a balanced
CBD:THC variety and smells bright like a sea breeze, with lemon and pine scents. Pennywise 1:1 is fabulous at reducing my pain and helps ward off impending migraines—it’s become my go-to bud.I grew Blue Dream because it is a high THC 
yielding plant and a great grower in my area—plus I love how it makes me feel.It was a great season, yielding a whopping 4½ pounds of dry bud. 
How Much Space Will You Need? 
Another factor in deciding how many plants to grow is how much space you have outside. Whether you grow in a pot, in a raised bed, or in the ground, cannabis needs ample room to grow and at least six hours of full sun per day. A typical cannabis plant will reach 6 to 9-plus feet tall and nearly as wide at maturity, depending on growing conditions, and needs a nice big area of soil to reach its best potential. Look at all of your available spaces—a sunny deck, an area of lawn that you can dig up and enrich, a raised vegetable bed, even a chunk of concrete or patio; any one of these areas could be an excellent place to grow cannabis. A way to get a quick read on whether or not you’ll have enough space for cannabis plants is to walk out into your garden. Stand right where you think a cannabis plant would grow well, then put out your arms, turn around in a circle, and look up. Do you see sky? Great. Did your hands move in a circle freely with no obstructions? Also great. This will be a good spot to grow one cannabis plant—because a mature cannabis plant at harvest will be about the size of an adult human. Repeat this exercise for each spot you think would work. 
How Much to Grow
Finally, a word about yield. The harvest per healthy cannabis plant grown outside in the sun is up to 1 pound of dried, cured bud. This amount can vary considerably, but this is an achievable, though high, benchmark for what to expect. If you’re used to thinking about cannabis in terms of grams, this is about 450 grams of dried bud. That’s a lot of weed! For perspective, a typical joint weighs about half a gram. So, as you decide how many plants to grow, consider how much weed you’d like to harvest as a key piece of information.


CHAPTER 2 
Designing Your Garden Space with Cannabis


When you act in your space—however small or big—to craft a healthy environment for your plants, you are a gardener. When you think ahead through the coming seasons and imagine the plants you can grow, you are thinking like a gardener. Whether you have a vast estate, a backyard bed, or a tiny porch, growing a plant with care makes you a gardener. One container filled with soil, planted, watered, and nurtured through its seasons is a garden. The word “garden” has its origin in the Latin hortus gardinus, which describes a place of enclosure for growing useful and beautiful plants. Gardens are where the human creative spirit works to craft a natural space into a new thing, a place with purpose and productivity in mind. The best gardeners work with nature, not against it. When we work with the gifts of our natural surroundings rather than fighting them, we are better gardeners. I advocate organic gardening practices, leaning heavily on good design, proper site selection, and optimal soil health. 
One of the most creative aspects of gardening is to design the garden space to your liking. When you design your garden space, you become—at least a little—a garden designer. There are many styles from which to gather inspiration. Each culture around the world has its own ways of gardening, stemming from the climate and sociological context in which it arose. Some of the most famous gardens throughout time are the walled gardens of Persia, the peaceful Zen gardens of Japan, the classical gardens of China, charming English cottage gardens, and the stately formal gardens of Europe. There are large numbers of publications and degree programs devoted to garden design. However, this chapter offers one central encouragement: cannabis works in just about any
sunny garden space. No matter what your garden’s current style (or lack thereof), you can add cannabis. And perhaps you can use cannabis as an incentive to improve the overall look and feel of your garden. Looking ahead to a healthy harvest is a great way to gain motivation to make your garden a productive, beautiful space for you and your plants. Trust me—when your friends hear you talk about your huge green weed plant, they will want to stop by for a visit. That’s a great incentive to get your garden designer game on. 
Take a moment to see your garden space with the mindset of a garden designer, and you will be rewarded by its usefulness and appeal in the future. One way to step into the role of garden designer is to correlate it to an activity you’ve likely had some experience with—arranging the look and feel of a room in your home. In fact, garden designers often use concepts and language borrowed from architecture and interior design to do their work. They think of gardens as having walls, floors, beds, focal points, ceilings—but instead of manufactured building materials, they use plants, soil, lumber, and stone. Like interior designers, you can coordinate the look of your garden rooms by grouping plants by color, size, and texture—but instead of fabrics, furniture, and paint, you can use flowers, fruit, leaves, and branches for your work. Gardeners think like parents, imagining the whole life cycle of the plants they grow, from seed to flower. Gardeners have the unique, added constraint of working with living things—plants. Personally, I love this aspect of gardening the most. We aren’t in control—we influence, we nurture. What a great life lesson: there is nothing perfect in gardening, but there is enormous abundance and surprise.
THREE COMMON GARDEN 
DESIGNS 
Let’s use three common garden types to gain confidence and inspiration: the container garden, the raised bed garden, and the garden room. Each of these three types of gardens will adapt to your individual style, whether it is a kitchen garden, wabi-sabi, cottage garden, minimalist and modern, lush and tropical, formal and ordered, or meandering and wild. 
Cannabis in a Container 
Constraint can be a catalyst for creativity. Perhaps the only spot you have for gardening is on a deck or patio. That’s no problem—let it be a motivation rather than a limitation. Allow the restriction of your limited space to become a catalyst for your creativity by gardening in containers. You can grow healthy, full-size cannabis in a container. The container garden is the simplest garden of all and is an ideal place for the beginning cannabis grower. It is also a high art form, perhaps most elegantly expressed in bonsai gardens— each little container holding a garden scene in perfectly scaled miniature. You can grow full-size, high-quality cannabis on a sunny deck off your apartment or on a concrete patio in your backyard. If you have access to a rooftop, this can be an excellent spot for cannabis container gardening because of its full-sun conditions. Even for those of you who have larger garden plots, a container garden may be the right choice. The single most important consideration for placing your container is ample sunlight. A plus for growing weed in a container is that you can move the cannabis plant to the light, adjusting placement as the seasons change to maximize your plant’s sun exposure. This may be a great solution for those of you with shady yards but sunny spots on a deck. Cannabis needs at least six or more hours of direct sunlight per
day to grow well—and more is better. Of course, this is only when cannabis is actually growing, so if you have a spot that receives less than this amount in late fall through spring, that’s not an issue. If you have very lightly dappled shade and the plant will receive eight or more hours of this exposure per day, this will work, too.

Once you’ve chosen a sunny spot, consider what type and size container to use. Cannabis is a large, fast-growing annual. Its roots are vigorous and will fill a large volume of soil, so a big container will allow for a full-size cannabis plant. Using fresh, high-quality planting mix is key to growing healthy cannabis in a container, no matter what size planter you choose. Every penny invested in good planting mix is money well spent. Containers are usually sold in standard sizes and are measured in units of volume, such as gallons or liters. The minimum size for any container should be 5 gallons. I grew plants in 15-gallon pots this past season and had full-size plants—both were more than 7 feet tall at harvest. Commercial growers will sometimes have 100-gallon grow bags for enormous cannabis plants. Good drainage is another very important consideration. Be sure to inspect the bottoms of the pots you want to use to ensure there are drainage holes.

If you have room for a few planters, consider creating an attractive grouping. The rule of three is a good design tip to create an appealing cluster of containers. Try planting some mint, lemon verbena, or lavender (see this page) in planters of the same material as your cannabis plant for the ultimate cannabis tisane—or herbal tea—planter garden. For a more cohesive look, purchase or make planters of the same material, allowing the beauty of the plants to create visual interest. Put these smaller planters on the sunward side of your cannabis plant’s larger container, so every plant receives the sun that they need to grow well. Grouping containers together will help keep the soil cooler, especially in those containers that are shaded by the pots in front. 
There are several different types of containers from which to choose to house your cannabis plant. Let’s explore the characteristics of the more commonly available containers, considering the pros and cons of each. 
Terra-cotta. These red-hued earthenware planters are a classic choice for containers. There is good reason for this. Terra-cotta means “baked earth” in Italian and is an apt description of what this material is. The low-fire clay used in this type of pot creates excellent conditions for your cannabis plant’s roots, since the walls of this natural earthenware material are porous and allow the soil to breathe and remain cool. Unglazed terra-cotta pots have a warm red-orange color; glazed terra-cotta comes in a rainbow of colors. While simple pots are inexpensive, the larger or more specially glazed pots can be costly. 
Pros: Terra-cotta planters provide excellent conditions for soil health, are readily available, come in many different shapes and colors, and offer visual appeal for most garden styles.
Cons: Terra-cotta containers that are large enough for cannabis can be heavy. Because of their porous walls, terra-cotta pots are prone to cracking during harsh winter freeze/thaw cycles and need to be emptied of their soil during the off-season and stored inside for longevity. If you live in a climate with mild winters, you can safely leave your terra-cotta pots outside with no fear of freeze/thaw damage. 
Felt planter. Commercial cannabis growers have used felt planters for a while, especially for covert outdoor cannabis grow operations. These felt bags are called grow bags in the cannabis trade, and home gardeners have adopted this term widely as well. These containers are usually made from felted recycled plastic but may be made from felted natural fibers that have been molded or stitched to form a pot. No drainage holes are needed for these bags, since they are naturally wicking and porous. 
Pros: Inexpensive, lightweight, and with excellent porosity, felt planters make a great choice for cannabis container growing. Because felt breathes so well, the soil ball remains cool, and there is no hard surface for the roots to contact—so no root bound plants. Look for handles on these planters if you plan to move them once planted. 
Cons: Felt planters can discolor from soil and water leaching into the material. Bags made from natural fibers may have lower durability, because constant contact with wet soil promotes decay, but they are all-natural and compostable. Plants grown in felt planters will require more frequent watering, since the fabric is porous and water will evaporate more quickly.
Ceramic. Made from a high-temperature–fired clay, ceramic pots are nearly always finished with a glaze and come in a large array of decorative finishes. They are strong but thinner-walled than terra cotta. Look for pots with drainage holes. 
Pros: There are beautiful ceramic planters available for those interested in a particular look for their pots. Ceramic pots are moisture retentive, since the planter walls are less permeable to the air than are those of unglazed terra-cotta. Ceramic pots provide good conditions for soil overall. 
Cons: Ceramic pots that are large enough to host a full season of cannabis growing will be heavy and can be expensive. Cannabis roots may begin to circle as they hit the inner edge of the ceramic pot and look for more soil, potentially creating less than perfect conditions toward the end of the grow season. Dark glazes may create high-temperature conditions for the root-ball, especially in hot, sunny climates. Although ceramic pots are more weather resistant than most unglazed terra-cotta, they will need to be emptied and stored inside in harsh winter climates to preserve their life span. 
Plastic. These pots can be made of any type of plastic or fiberglass, may be single- or double-walled, and are available in many colors, sizes, and shapes. 
Pros: Plastic is inexpensive and readily available. These pots are moisture retentive, since their walls are impermeable to water and air. Plastic pots are durable and can be left outside during winter without fear of cracking, although they will have a longer life span if they are protected from harsh winters.
Cons: Plastic made from petrochemicals is non-renewable and non-compostable, so plastic pots are a poor choice for environmental sustainability. Plastic made from renewable sources is a better choice. Plastic and fiberglass pots are moisture-proof, so roots may circle the insides of the pots as they reach maturity. 
Metal. Metal pots are usually made from aluminum or steel. 
Pros: Metals pots are lightweight relative to terra-cotta or ceramic and are very durable. Like any nonporous material, they are moisture retentive. 
Cons: Metal conducts heat, so this type of pot may provide high swings of heat to the roots of your cannabis plant. Steel containers are usually on the expensive side. Metal pots are moisture-proof, so roots may circle the insides of the pots as they reach maturity. 
Wood. Wooden containers are manufactured with various types of wood, often from bamboo or old wine barrels that have been cut in half. If you plan to use a wooden planter, make sure it has adequate drainage holes. 
Pros: A wooden planter provides good conditions for soil, since it offers permeability to air and moisture. Wooden pots are relatively durable, especially if they are made from rot-resistant cedar or redwood. 
Cons: Wooden planters can be costly, especially finely crafted planters or ones that use more expensive woods. Be sure to avoid pots made with chemically treated wood, since cannabis can absorb these chemicals into its cell structure.
Concrete. These planters are made from Portland cement and an aggregate. The aggregate can be mineral or natural fiber—even hemp is used to make concrete (hempcrete). 
Pros: Concrete planters are great if you’re looking for a modern, minimalist design. They are durable and strong and will last for many growing seasons. 
Cons: Concrete is heavy and usually expensive relative to other planters. Brand-new concrete planters may leach alkali into the soil, causing the soil pH to rise; this can weaken your cannabis plant. 
Other materials. Hypertufa, fiberglass, raffia, cane, glass, cardboard, woven fabrics—basically anything nontoxic and water resistant that you use to keep soil in place for the growing season— can become a planter for your cannabis. 
Cannabis in a Raised Bed 
If you have a bit of land, even a small backyard plot, you can expand your cannabis growing space to include raised beds. What is a raised bed? The concept of a raised bed will likely be familiar to anyone who grows vegetables. It is a wide, open-bottomed structure, used to create a space above the ground level and is filled with rich soil mix. Raised beds are often used for growing annual vegetables—although any plant can grow in a raised bed. Raised beds are usually constructed of rot-resistant wood or metal but can be made from stone, concrete, brick, caged rocks, or other durable materials. Since cannabis is an annual crop, it makes sense to grow it in an area where you might also grow a healthy tomato plant—both require similar conditions. Raised beds are excellent options for steep ground, too, since they can be built to act as
terraces on slopes. They are also wonderful for drought-prone areas, because they offer a focused area to water plants. And for gardening in very wet climates, raised beds offer superb drainage, which cannabis needs. One other benefit of raised beds for cool, wet winter climates (think Seattle and British Columbia) is that the soil in a raised bed will warm quickly in the spring, allowing for the best soil conditions for planting cannabis. I love raised beds for the flexibility they offer in creating ideal soil conditions. 
In my garden… 
Where I live and grow, our soils are clay type. Over the years, I’ve continually amended my garden’s soil, and the overall fertility and structure is much improved with annual additions of compost. But when I want fresh, deep, rich soil for my nutrient hungry annual crops,I love my raised bed.I have learned that many fast-growing plants do best when planted in fresh soil, and cannabis is one of them.

As with any planting scheme for your cannabis, be sure that your cannabis will have full sun and freedom from encroaching tree roots. As you imagine where to best situate your cannabis plants, use your own body (see this page) to help visualize the size of your plant at maturity. Then consider the impact it will have on the surrounding plants in the same raised bed. 
If you have a new raised bed filled with rich, fresh planting mix, then you are ready to plant your cannabis directly into the soil at planting time in your area. If you have an existing raised bed in which you’ve grown plants during previous seasons, you will need to amend or replace some of the existing planting mix. (See chapter 3 to learn more about the soil requirements for cannabis growing.) 
Cannabis is a fast-growing plant, each requiring up to 16 square feet of space at maturity—think 4 by 4 feet, with 2 feet of soil depth. For all growers outside of the tropics, we need to be mindful of the shadows cast by plants onto their botanical neighbors. For those growing in the Northern Hemisphere, position taller plants northward of shorter plants; reverse this in the Southern Hemisphere. 
When you first place your new plant in the soil, though, it will be small and will look a little isolated in the raised bed. I suggest that you plant a quick-maturing companion crop to take advantage of the space that your cannabis will eventually grow into. Try growing a crop of lettuce, arugula, radishes, or quick-maturing cooking greens in the area around the baby cannabis plant. By the time your cannabis plant is large enough to crowd out these annuals, you will already have harvested them—a gardening twofer. Known as biointensive gardening, this is a familiar concept to many and is
often referred to as French intensive gardening or square foot gardening. It is a space- and resource-efficient method of gardening that translates well to the cannabis gardener’s needs. The concept of intensively planted raised beds is not uniquely French and has been utilized by many gardening and farming cultures around the world. 
Cannabis in a Perennial Garden 
I have a lovely little cottage garden in my backyard. More accurately, my whole backyard—25 by 30 feet total—is a cottage garden. It’s just the right size for me to treat it like a single garden room. For those of you with more land in which to garden, you may have garden areas such as a front yard, side yard, or backyard— each with its own light, soil, trees, shrubs, and hardscaping. Many gardeners have space in their landscape dedicated to perennial beds. These are areas bordering a lawn or patio that have a variety of long-lived flowers, grasses, and shrubs. The perennial bed is often densely planted to create a seasonally changing tapestry of beauty and usefulness, especially when it contains fruiting shrubs and herbs for the kitchen. 
A perennial bed with rich soil can easily welcome a couple of cannabis plants, size allowing. When planting cannabis in an existing perennial bed, there are three important considerations: space, soil quality, and sun. Sound familiar? These are the same exact considerations that we have already discussed in the container garden and raised bed sections above. I will highlight here the special issues you need to think about in an existing perennial bed. For those who garden in areas where deer are abundant, take care to protect your cannabis plants from them. Deer will happily nibble on weed babies.

The space. Look at your perennial bed and find a spot where you think a full-size cannabis plant would work. As before, walk out to the spot, put your arms out, and turn in a circle (see this page). Will a cannabis plant grow here without being crowded out by a shrub or tree? Is there full sun exposure? At full size, will the cannabis plant shade out a plant behind it? If all of these things seem good, the next task is to examine the ground you’ll be planting the cannabis in. Are there smaller plants growing within a 5-foot circle of the cannabis plant’s center? If so, they will be impacted by dense shade toward the end of the summer, so be mindful of these plants’ needs. Investigate the soil in which you’ll be planting the cannabis. Unless you have been amending and tending your garden soil for a while or if you are lucky enough to live in an area with naturally fertile, well-draining soil, you’ll need to amend the soil with compost prior to the planting season. (See chapter 3 for more specifics on composting.) Do a little digging to be sure that there aren’t roots from surrounding shrubs or trees that may hinder the growth of your cannabis plant. If there are, plan on digging out these roots to create a nice, loose area of soil for your cannabis. 
Companion plants. Once you’ve located the right spot in your perennial bed for your cannabis plant—or more than one if you have room—consider what you can plant around the cannabis plant. Think of both the look and the usefulness of companion plants for your weed. If you live in a mild winter area such as California or the South, you have the luxury of time—via the year long gardening potential. This will enable you to plant something for winter and early spring beauty before you plant your weed. 
In my garden…
I garden all year long in my mild-winter Bay Area backyard.I have an area in the ground for two full-size cannabis plants and have several months of growing season before I plant the 
cannababies in late April.is fall,I planted a couple hundred spring blooming bulbs and seeds of the California native spring ephemeral baby blue eyes (Nemophila menziesii).ese will be bloomed out and dormant by the time my cannabis plant is tall enough to shade them.is garden has beauty and productivity throughout the year. Another option for my cannabis space is to grow sweet peas—one of my favorites.ese are spring/summer bloomers in much of the temperate world, but in my garden, they are an early spring bloomer. My trick is to plant 4-inch pots of sweet pea plants in late fall. Come early spring, these well rooted sweet peas clamber up a temporary structure and start to bloom. By the time the sweet peas have moved beyond their peak, the young cannabis plant will be ready to grow and shine. And there’s a bonus: sweet peas—like all legumes—add nitrogen to the soil, providing a boost to the fast-growing cannabis plant. 
Cannabis in a Cutting Garden 
For those of you with cutting gardens—welcome to your new floral arrangement superstar: cannabis. A cutting garden is simply one in which flowers are grown for cutting or for use in floral arrangements to grace your home. A cutting garden is a little different from a perennial bed in that its primary purpose is to be productive, rather than beautiful. Not to say that a well-designed cutting bed can’t be beautiful, but a cutting bed is often arranged with more function in mind than visual appeal alone—annuals planted in rows, with air space between plants to prioritize the long
stems and floral production desired in a vase. Annual cutting gardens are ideally set up to accommodate cannabis, because cannabis shares the same cultural conditions of many popular annual cutting flowers such as cosmos, sunflowers, zinnias, cornflowers, larkspur, poppies, coreopsis, and ranunculus. As long as you remember just how large the mature cannabis plant will become and place it appropriately in the cutting garden, you’ll be in great shape. Cannabis is wonderful and unexpected when used in floral arrangements. As cannabis grows, it produces many side branches that can be easily incorporated into bouquets. Weed holds up beautifully in a vase, adding structure, texture, and je ne sais quoi to your bouquet. For those of you living in an area in which outdoor cannabis growing is legally allowed but is still new, consider cultivating cannabis in the midst of similar-looking plants to ease this notorious beauty into your landscape. Some plants that offer the appropriate scale to accompany cannabis include cleomes, sunflowers, tithonia, large coreopsis, bush zinnias, gladiolas, and flowering tobacco. 
Cannabis in an Herb Garden 
Cannabis is perhaps best thought of as a kitchen herb, so it’s a natural fit for any herb garden. It bears repeating that cannabis is large relative to most nontree garden plants. But if you allow for the majestic proportions of cannabis, it is a perfect fit for an herb garden. Cannabis is delicious in the teapot and pairs nicely with several standard garden herbs. Fresh cannabis leaves make an excellent tisane (herbal tea) with soothing, calming properties. There are several easy-to-grow companion plants that you can harvest and infuse with cannabis for a delicious beverage. My favorite garden plants for this use are lemon verbena, thyme, German chamomile, and lavender. I especially love spearmint; I
grow several types of mint, and all are welcome additions to the teapot along with cannabis (see this page). 

Best Herbal Companion Plants 
Lemon verbena, or Aloysia citrodora (USDA zone 8–10), is a tall airy shrub, native to western South America, with deliciously scented, pointed leaves.It sheds its leaves in late fall in my mild winter garden and is one of the last to leaf out in the spring.It does well with a light winter pruning to maintain plant vigor and to control size.e leaves are ready to use in tisanes as soon as they are formed and will remain useful throughout the season, until they begin to shrivel and fall off the plant at the end of the growth season. Luckily, lemon verbena leaves dry easily and can
offer a delightful reminder of summer during the dark days of winter. Plant lemon verbena in a full-sun spot with room to grow slowly over the years.ey do well with regular watering but are tolerant of heat and drought.ey are remarkably pest resistant, due in part to the high essential oil content of their leaves and the leaves’slightly rough texture. As an upright grower, lemon verbena shrubs are perfect to underplant with low-growing herbs and owers.is tender perennial may be grown in a container and brought inside in cold winter climates. 
Mint. Cannabis and mint together make a delicious tisane.Try growing mint around your cannabis.While there are many members of the mint family, when most folks think of mint, they mean spearmint. Most mints possess an unmistakably fresh, cool scent prole.While there are hundreds of varieties of mint, they all possess similar growth habits. Mints are easy-going, low growing (up to 3 feet tall but usually shorter) garden plants that enjoy moist soil and dappled shade to full sun.ey are happiest in rich soil but are tolerant of many soil types.ey have tender, green crenulated leaves that cover the spreading stolons (creeping horizontal plant stems). A word of caution is needed if you intend to plant mint in the ground: they are wanderers and will spread to seek out ideal sun and moisture. For this reason, many gardeners are wary of planting mints directly in their gardens, since mints are truly rambunctious wherever there is abundant moisture.I live in a dry summer climate and thus allow several types of mint to ramble all over my garden.I keep their growth in check with occasional removal—they are easy to rip out of the soil. One of my favorite mints for the teapot (or the cocktail shaker) is Kentucky Colonel spearmint—a classic in
a mint julep. Chocolate mint is also a richly scented, delicious mint and accompanies the deep, musky avor of cannabis with air.
CHAPTER 3 
e Four Elements: 
Sun, Soil, Airow, and Water


Whether you garden in a container, a raised bed, or as part of an established in-ground garden, there are priorities to keep in mind to achieve a beautiful, healthy cannabis grow. The four vital considerations as we plan our grow are sun, soil, water, and air. 
SUN 
Sun is plant food—literally. Plants make their own food using sunshine for energy. It only makes sense that since cannabis plants are large, fast-growing annuals, they will need a lot of energy to fuel their growth. Feed your cannabis what it needs—sunlight—and it will do the rest. Cannabis needs six or more hours of direct sun per day to thrive. 
If plants make their own food, then why do gardeners talk about “feeding” their plants? What exactly is plant food? Plant food is better understood as a supplement—it’s all about giving plants certain nutrients that they can’t manufacture out of sunshine and air. The term fertilizer is a more accurate one to use. There are a number of substances that plants need in order to create the hundreds of different molecules they manufacture. 
The big three. The three nutrients that plants need in greatest quantity—macronutrients—are nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K). If you’ve ever read the label on a prepared plant food, it will show these primary nutrients as three numbers, always in the order N-P-K. Nitrogen is a crucial part of chlorophyll, the vivid green molecule that allows plants to convert sun energy into sugar and cellulose. Plants also require a number of molecules in tiny amounts—micronutrients—including but not limited to
magnesium, iron, calcium, zinc, boron, copper, manganese, molybdenum, and sulfur. Healthy soil, rich in decayed plant material and microbial life, provides all of these macro- and micronutrients and much more to your plant. Let nature take care 
of feeding your plant, and both you and your cannabis garden will be happy. 
SOIL 
The second of the four elements for heathy plants is soil. Cannabis is hearty and resilient—if planted in good soil. Farmer Joel Salatin describes soil this way: “Soil is life.” While I differ with him on politics, I agree with him about the vital role of soil health in gardening and farming. There is more life per square foot in rich, healthy soil than anywhere else on Earth. Healthy, living soil contains up to fifty thousand microorganisms per gram of soil—an astonishing reality. There is not one soil—there are many soils—and they all have some things in common. Soil is made up of inorganic materials that are dependent on the underlying mineral types. These particles range in size from microscopically small to large rocks. These inorganic particles are the main defining characteristic of soil types and give them their names. The minerals naturally present in the inorganic portions of soil are what provide the micronutrients essential for healthy growth—but these minerals are made accessible to plants by the actions of their resident microbes. Each soil is best understood as a unique ecosystem of a vast array of microbes, fungi, insects, and animals living in a substrate (base material) of inorganic and organic material, air, and water. It is a dynamic, life-filled ecosystem into which plants plunge their roots to gain the water and micronutrients they need to grow and flourish.