CANNABIS 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants—Industrial Profiles 
Individual volumes in this series provide both industry and academia with in-depth coverage of one major medicinal or aromatic plant of industrial importance. 
Edited by Dr Roland Hardman 
Volume 1 
Valerian 
edited by Peter J.Houghton 
Volume 2 
Penilla 
edited by He-Ci Yu, Kenichi Kosuna and Megumi Haga 
Volume 3 
Poppy 
edited by Jeno Bernáth 
Volume 4 
Cannabis 
edited by David T.Brown 
Other volumes in preparation 
Artemisia, edited by C.Wright 
Capsicum, edited by P.Bosland and A.Levy 
Cardamom, edited by P.N.Ravindran and K.J.Madusoodanan 
Carum, edited by É.Németh 
Chamomile, edited by R.Franke and H.Schilcher 
Cinnamon and Cassia, edited by P.N.Ravindran and S.Ravindran 
Claviceps, edited by V.Kren and L.Cvak 
Colchicum, edited by V.Šimánek 
Curcuma, edited by B.A.Nagasampagi and A.P.Purohit 
Eucalyptus, edited by J.Coppen 
Evening Primrose, edited by P.Lapinskas 
Feverfew, edited by M.I.Berry 
Ginkgo, edited by T. van Beek 
Ginseng, by W.Court 
Hypericum, edited by K.Berger Büter and B.Büter 
Illicium and Pimpinella, edited by M.Miró Jodral 
Licorice, by L.E.Craker, L.Kapoor and N.Mamedov 
Melaleuca, edited by I.Southwell 
Neem, by H.S.Puri 
Ocimum, edited by R.Hiltunen and Y.Holt 
Piper Nigrum, edited by P.N.Ravindran 
Plantago, edited by C.Andary and S.Nishibe 
Saffron, edited by M.Negbi 
Salvia, edited by S.Kintzios 
Stevia, edited by A.D.Kinghorn 
Tilia, edited by K.P.Svoboda and J.Collins 
Thymus, edited by W.Letchamo, E.Stahl-Biskup and F.Saez 
Trigonella, edited by G.A.Petropoulos 
Urtica, by G.Kavalali 
This book is part of a series. The publisher will accept continuation orders which may be cancelled at any time and which provide for automatic billing and shipping of each title in the series upon publication. Please write for details. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS 
The Genus Cannabis 
Edited by 
David T.Brown 
School of Pharmacy, University of Portsmouth, UK 
harwood academic publishers 
Australia • Canada • China • France • Germany • India • Japan 
Luxembourg • Malaysia • The Netherlands • Russia • Singapore Switzerland • Thailand 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2003. 
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.” 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group. 
All rights reserved. 
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Printed in India. 
Amsteldijk 166 
1st Floor 
1079 LH Amsterdam 
The Netherlands 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Cannabis: the genus Cannabis.—(Medicinal and aromatic 
plants: industrial profiles; v. 4) 
1. Cannabis 2. Cannabis—Therapeutic use 
I. Brown, David T. 
615.7'827 
ISBN 0-203-30422-5 Master e-book ISBN 
ISBN 0-203-34413-8 (Adobe eReader Format) 
ISBN 90-5702-291-5 (Print Edition) 
ISSN 1027-4502 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CONTENTS 
Preface to the Series vii Preface ix Contributors xi 
1 Cannabis Use and Abuse by Man: An Historical Perspective 1 Simon Wills 
2 The Cannabis Plant: Botany, Cultivation and Processing for Use 29 Amala Raman 
3 The Chemistry of Cannabis 55 Amala Raman and Alpana Joshi 
4 Analytical and Legislative Aspects of Cannabis 71 Geoffrey F.Phillips 
5 Non-Medicinal Uses of Cannabis sativa 115 David T.Brown 
6 Advances in Cannabinoid Receptor Pharmacology 125 Roger G.Pertwee 
7 The Therapeutic Potential for Cannabis and its Derivatives 175 David T.Brown 
8 Cannabis and Cannabinoids in Pain Relief 223 Mario A.P.Price and William G. Notcutt 
9 Cannabis Addiction and Withdrawal: Attitudes and Implications 247 David E.Smith and Richard B.Seymour 
10 Side Effects of Cannabis Use and Abuse 253 Simon Wills 
v 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
PREFACE TO THE SERIES 
There is increasing interest in industry, academia and the health sciences in medicinal and aromatic plants. In passing from plant production to the eventual product used by the public, many sciences are involved. This series brings together information which is currently scattered through an ever increasing number of journals. Each volume gives an in-depth look at one plant genus, about which an area specialist has assembled information ranging from the production of the plant to market trends and quality control. 
Many industries are involved such as forestry, agriculture, chemical, food, flavour, beverage, pharmaceutical, cosmetic and fragrance. The plant raw materials are roots, rhizomes, bulbs, leaves, stems, barks, wood, flowers, fruits and seeds. These yield gums, resins, essential (volatile) oils, fixed oils, waxes, juices, extracts and spices for medicinal and aromatic purposes. All these commodities are traded world-wide. A dealer’s market report for an item may say “Drought in the country of origin has forced up prices”. 
Natural products do not mean safe products and account of this has to be taken by the above industries, which are subject to regulation. For example, a number of plants which are approved for use in medicine must not be used in cosmetic products. 
The assessment of safe to use starts with the harvested plant material which has to comply with an official monograph. This may require absence of, or prescribed limits of, radioactive material, heavy metals, aflatoxin, pesticide residue, as well as the required level of active principle. This analytical control is costly and tends to exclude small batches of plant material. Large scale contracted mechanised cultivation with designated seed or plantlets is now preferable. 
Today, plant selection is not only for the yield of active principle, but for the plant’s ability to overcome disease, climatic stress and the hazards caused by mankind. Such methods as in vitro fertilisation, meristem cultures and somatic embryogenesis are used. The transfer of sections of DNA is giving rise to controversy in the case of some end-uses of the plant material. 
Some suppliers of plant raw material are now able to certify that they are supplying organically-farmed medicinal plants, herbs and spices. The Economic Union directive (CVO/EU No 2092/91) details the specifications for the obligatory quality controls to be carried out at all stages of production and processing of organic products. 
Fascinating plant folklore and ethnopharmacology leads to medicinal potential. Examples are the muscle relaxants based on the arrow poison, curare, from species of Chondrodendron, and the antimalarials derived from species of Cinchona and Artemisia. The methods of detection of pharmacological activity have become increasingly reliable and specific, frequently involving enzymes in bioassays and avoiding the use of laboratory animals. By using bioassay linked fractionation of crude plant juices or extracts, compounds can be specifically targeted which, for example, inhibit blood platelet aggregation, or have antitumour, or antiviral, or any other required activity. With the assistance of robotic devices, all the members of a genus may be readily screened. However, the plant material must be fully authenticated by a specialist. 
vii 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
viii PREFACE TO THE SERIES 
The medicinal traditions of ancient civilisations such as those of China and India have a large armamentaria of plants in their pharmacopoeias which are used throughout South East Asia. A similar situation exists in Africa and South America. Thus, a very high percentage of the World’s population relies on medicinal and aromatic plants for their medicine. Western medicine is also responding. Already in Germany all medical practitioners have to pass an examination in phytotherapy before being allowed to practise. It is noticeable that throughout Europe and the USA, medical, pharmacy and health related schools are increasingly offering training in phytotherapy. 
Multinational pharmaceutical companies have become less enamoured of the single compound magic bullet cure. The high costs of such ventures and the endless competition from me too compounds from rival companies often discourage the attempt. Independent phytomedicine companies have been very strong in Germany. However, by the end of 1995, eleven (almost all) had been acquired by the multinational pharmaceutical firms, acknowledging the lay public’s growing demand for phytomedicines in the Western World. 
The business of dietary supplements in the Western World has expanded from the Health Store to the pharmacy. Alternative medicine includes plant based products. Appropriate measures to ensure the quality, safety and efficacy of these either already exist or are being answered by greater legislative control by such bodies as the Food and Drug Administration of the USA and the recently created European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products, based in London. 
In the USA, the Dietary Supplement and Health Education Act of 1994 recognised the class of phytotherapeutic agents derived from medicinal and aromatic plants. Furthermore, under public pressure, the US Congress set up an Office of Alternative Medicine and this office in 1994 assisted the filing of several Investigational New Drug (IND) applications, required for clinical trials of some Chinese herbal preparations. The significance of these applications was that each Chinese preparation involved several plants and yet was handled as a single IND. A demonstration of the contribution to efficacy, of each ingredient of each plant, was not required. This was a major step forward towards more sensible regulations in regard to phytomedicines. 
My thanks are due to the staff of Harwood Academic Publishers who have made this series possible and especially to the volume editors and their chapter contributors for the authoritative information. 
Roland Hardman 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
PREFACE 
Cannabis sativa is a dioecious, bushy plant, probably originating from central Asia, but now considerably more widely disseminated and enjoying a truly international reputation. Records indicate that cannabis was used by man some 2–3,000 years before Christ. Then, as now, it provided a source of fuel, textiles, paper, rope, medicines and intoxication. 
The plant exudes a resin containing psychoactive compounds called cannabinoids. Trichomes which secrete the resin are most abundant in the flowering heads and surrounding leaves. There are over 60 cannabinoids, the most familiar of these being delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). The amount of resin produced, and its 
cannabinoid content are strongly influenced by plant gender, cultivation conditions and time of harvest. In addition to naturally occurring cannabinoids, the search for new ‘phytopharmaceuticals’ has led to the development of synthetic or semisynthetic derivatives with enhanced medicinal properties and reduced side effects. This in turn has led to a greater understanding of cannabinoid pharmacology and pharmacokinetics in addition to providing several promising lead medicinal compounds. 
Cannabis and its derivatives are used medicinally in a range of disorders; although often illicitly so. Traditional uses such as the relief of pain, have been extended to include the reduction of intra-occular pressure in glaucoma, relief of spasticity in multiple sclerosis, treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, and stimulation of appetite in AIDS patients. This book reviews evidence for the justification of these uses. Cannabis also has its darker side; it is the most commonly abused illicit substance on the planet. A body of evidence suggests that cannabis can cause both physical and psychological harm, although the extent of this is the topic of hot debate, extended in this volume. 
There have been at least 23 international symposia on cannabis which are referenced, together with over 700 other citations, in this book. In addition, a search on the World Wide Web reveals a burgeoning number of correspondents wishing to air their views on all aspects of cannabis use. This serves to illustrate the interest which cannabis still generates. 
Cannabis has had a long and chequered history spanning some 5,000 years, as the source of substances of abuse, of medicines, and products useful in manufacturing industry. Study of derivatives from the cannabis plant are still providing us with surprises and possibilities which sustain our fascination with the plant. This book provides a detailed review of the use and abuse of cannabis and the national and international problems which surround them. It provides a body of evidence, in one volume, from which the reader can obtain a clear view of where society stands in its relationship with cannabis and the likely paths which that relationship may take in the future. 
David T.Brown 
ix 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
David T.Brown 
CONTRIBUTORS Mario A.P.Price 
Senior Lecturer in Clinical Pharmacy School of Pharmacy 
University of Portsmouth 
St Michael’s Building 
White Swan Road 
Portsmouth PO1 2DT 
UK 
Alpana Joshi 
Research Associate 
National Center for the Development of Natural Products 
University of Mississippi 
MS 38677 
USA 
William G.Notcutt 
Consultant Anaesthetist 
The James Paget Hospital NHS Trust Lowestoft Road 
Gorleston, Great Yarmouth 
Norfolk NR31 6LA 
UK 
Roger G.Pertwee 
Department of Biomedical Sciences Institute of Medical Sciences 
University of Aberdeen 
Foresterhill 
Aberdeen AB25 2ZD 
UK 
Geoffrey F.Phillips 
62 Parkhill Road 
Bexley 
Kent DA5 1HY 
UK 
xi 
Senior Pharmacist 
The James Paget Hospital NHS Trust Lowestoft Road 
Gorleston, Great Yarmouth 
Norfolk NR31 6LA 
UK 
Amala Raman 
Lecturer in Pharmacognosy 
Department of Pharmacy 
King’s College London 
Manresa Road 
London SW3 6LX 
UK 
Richard B.Seymour 
Information and Education Director Office of the President 
Haight Ashbury Free Clinics Inc. 409 Clayton Street 
San Francisco CA 94117 
USA 
David E.Smith 
President and Medical Director Haight Ashbury Free Clinics Inc. 409 Clayton Street 
San Francisco CA 94117 
USA 
Simon Wills 
Head of Drug Information Service Pharmacy Department 
St Mary’s Hospital 
Portsmouth PO3 6AD 
UK 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
1. CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN: AN 
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE 
SIMON WILLS 
Head of the Drug Information Service, St Mary’s Hospital, Portsmouth, UK 
ORIGINS 
The hemp plant, Cannabis sativa, is native to central Asia north of the Himalayas. It was initially confined to an area stretching from Turkestan in the west, to Pakistan in the east. Southern China probably marked the northernmost boundary of this original 
domain. Hemp has subsequently become much more widespread, largely due to the intervention of man. Cannabis, a dioecious species, is a member of the Cannabidaceae family, which contains only one other genus—Humulus. The hop plant, Humulus lupulus, is used to preserve and flavour beer. 
Throughout history, the hemp plant has been widely used: the seeds can be eaten and also produce oil for lamps or cooking; the stems produce fibres for textiles or rope; the flowering heads and leaves produce resin used as medicine or for intoxication. 
ANCIENT CHINA 
The ancient Chinese, and others inhabiting the plant’s native region of central Asia, must have discovered the properties of cannabis centuries before it came to the attention of other more distant civilisations. In the right conditions the plant grows quickly to maturity, and the multiplicity of potential uses made it too valuable to be ignored. Copies of a Chinese herbal, thought to have been originally written in the 3rd millennium BC by the emperor Shen Nung, show that cannabis was used medicinally (Mechoulam, 1986). This is the most archaic written record of the uses of cannabis. The original does not survive, but later copies reveal that the conditions treated included rheumatism, gynaecological disorders, absentmindedness and malaria. In this herbal, and in others written much later, excessive use is described as causing symptoms akin to intoxication, usually described as the ‘appearance of spirits’. Hua Tu (115–205 AD) was a renowned surgeon in ancient China. He is believed to have used cannabis as a form of anaesthetic (Guthrie, 1946). Following administration of the drug to patients, he performed a variety of operations including laparotomies and splenectomies. 
A biography of the Chinese physician Hoa-tho, who practised around 220 AD, reveals a knowledge of the anaesthetic and analgesic effects of cannabis which was generally administered in a drink of wine: 
…he administered a preparation of hemp (Ma-Yo) and, in the course of several minutes, an insensibility developed as if the patient had been plunged into drunkenness or deprived of life. Then, according to the case, he performed the opening, the incision or the amputation and 
1 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
2 SIMON WILLS 
relieved the cause of the malady; then he apposed the tissues by sutures and applied liniments. After a certain number of days or the end of the month the patient finds he has recovered without having experienced the slightest pain during the operation. 
(Walton, 1938a) 
The oldest preserved specimens of hemp are portions of cloth from a Chinese burial site dated to around 1200BC (Richardson, 1988). However, clay pots at earlier sites sometimes show markings which may be impressions of the woven or twisted fibres. Hemp was widely used as a basic clothing material by the majority of Chinese society 
who could not afford silk—and this persisted until cotton was introduced in the 10th or 11th century. Hemp was also used to make paper. During the period 33–7BC, Fan Sheng-chih, a consultant to the Emperor, wrote a manual on farming techniques which included a detailed discussion of the method for raising cannabis and other plants. So important was the crop that when the population lost confidence in the state coinage during the reign of Emperor Wang Mang (9–23 AD), it became one of the basic commodities which was used as currency in its place (Twitchett and Loewe, 1986). 
At the turn of the century the British botanist, Ernest Wilson, visited China and reported on the method of preparation of cannabis for fibre production (Wilson, 1913). He described a process which had not changed for thousands of years: 
Several plants yielding fibres valued for textile and cordage purposes are grown in China. In Szechuan the most important of these is the true Hemp (Cannabis sativa), colloquially known as “Hou-ma”. This crop is abundantly cultivated around Wenchang Hsien and P’i Hsien. It is a spring crop, the seeds being sown in February and the plants harvested the end of May and beginning of June, just as they commence to flower. The stems are allowed to grow thickly together and reach 8 feet in height. The culms are reaped, stripped of their leaves, and often the fibre is removed there and then. More commonly, however, the stems are placed in pits filled with water and allowed to ret for a few days; they are then removed, sun-dried, stacked in hollow cones, surrounded by mats, and bleached by burning sulphur beneath the heaps. After these processes the fibrous bark is stripped off by hand. The woody stems that remain after the bark has been removed are burned, and the ashes resulting, mixed with gunpowder, enter into the manufacture of fire-crackers. Hemp, or “Hou-ma,” is the best of fibres produced in Western China for rope making and cordage purposes generally. It is also used locally for making grain-sacks and coarse wearing apparel for the poorer classes. Quantities are used in the city of Paoning Fu for these latter purposes. It is in great demand on native river-craft and is largely exported down river to other parts of China. It is this hemp that is principally exported from Szechuan. True Hemp (Cannabis) is an annual and is grown as a summer crop in the mountains for the sake of its oil containing seeds. Hemp oil is expressed and used as an illuminant and is said not to congeal in the coldest weather. 
There appears to be a dearth of information on the abuse of cannabis in China. It is unlikely that deliberate intoxication was not described through ignorance of this effect. The tradition of Chinese medicine has been to investigate and classify the properties of an enormous range of natural products. Some have speculated that the effects of intoxication with cannabis might be incompatible with the Chinese temperament, sense of public dignity and attitude to life (Walton, 1938; Mechoulam, 1986). 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 3 
ANCIENT EGYPT 
The oldest surviving original document which mentions cannabis is the Ebers papyrus of Egypt, which dates from the 16th century BC. A hieroglyphic symbol (pronounced “shemshemet”) has been assumed to represent cannabis because the plant referred to in the text is cited as a source of both fibre and medicine (Mechoulam, 1986; Nunn, 1996). It was administered orally to treat “mothers and children” for an unstated purpose, and was also employed as an enema, eye preparation and medicated bandage. Cannabis is mentioned briefly in a number of later medical papyri in which additional methods of administration are described including vaginal application and use as a fumigant (Nunn, 1996). However, the infrequency of reference and lack of therapeutic detail suggest that cannabis was not commonly used medicinally. There is also no explicit description of the intoxicating effects of cannabis. Its use in incense may reveal an association with religious ritual—perhaps to produce hallucinations of a quasireligious nature—but this must remain speculative. Analysis of hair from Egyptian mummies dating back to 1070BC has revealed surprisingly high levels of cannabis: 800–4100 ng/g compared to 2–1000ng/g for present day German drug addicts (Parschet al., 1993). Only the higher echelons of Egyptian society were mummified and these sections of society often had important religious functions. Cannabis was not native to the area, and so it might have been available in limited supply such that it was used mainly by the more prosperous elite. 
THE BIBLE AND JUDEA 
There are no obvious references to cannabis in the Bible. However, the neighbouring Assyrians are known to have used cannabis widely for a variety of medicinal purposes. Cannabis was administered orally for the treatment of impotence and depression, topically for bruises and by inhalation for a disease assumed to be arthritis. The drug was also used in various forms to ward off evil (Mechoulam, 1986). Until the late seventh century before Christ, the Jewish and Assyrian peoples were in close contact (Mechoulam et al., 1991) and because of 
their geographical proximity it is most unlikely that the Jews were unaware of the existence of cannabis. Mechoulam has speculated that following the decline of the Assyrian civilisation, Jewish kings such as Josiah may have sought to purge their culture of Assyrian influences which may have been seen as pagan or immoral by the orthodox. Any existing references to cannabis in the Old Testament could have been removed at this time. Despite this, Mechoulam cites one instance where the ancient word for cannabis might have been preserved in the Bible. In the Old Testament, the prophet Ezekiel mentions trade in a product called pannag. 
Judah and the cities in what was once the Kingdom of Israel sent merchants with wheat, minnith and pannag, and with honey, oil and balm. 
(Ezekiel, Ch. 27 v. 17) 
The letters ‘p’ and ‘b’ are often interchangeable in Hebrew, and pannag or bannag is thus very similar to the Sanskrit word for cannabis bhanga, the Hindu bhang and the Persian bang. It has even been speculated that some of the more vivid personal 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
4 SIMON WILLS 
experiences, or revelations, recounted in the Bible may have been descriptions of cannabis intoxication. Examples include the madness of King Saul, and the almost psychedelic visions of the prophet Ezekiel (Creighton, 1903). 
Cannabis was certainly in use in Jerusalem during the later stages of Roman occupation. The remains of a fourteen year old girl and a full-term baby were found near Jerusalem in 1993 (Zlas et al., 1993). These were dated to the 4th century AD by coins buried with the bodies. The remnants of burned cannabis were also found, leading to speculation that drug fumes may have been inhaled as an aid to childbirth— either as an analgesic or to aid uterine contractions. But this interpretation has been questioned (Prioreschi and Babin, 1993). The burning of cannabis might equally have represented part of the burial ritual, or simply a popular habit amongst the indigenous people. 
PREHISTORIC EUROPE AND SCYTHIA 
Hemp seeds are the most durable part of the plant, and so are most likely to be preserved at archaeological sites. Seeds have been found associated with Neolithic habitations in Germany, Switzerland, Austria and Rumania (Rudgley, 1993). Rudgley speculates that hemp may have initially grown as a weed around prehistoric settlements, particularly since the rubbish piles which accompany many dwellings would typically have been rich in nitrogen, and Cannabis sativa is a nitrophilic species. 
Objects known as ‘polypod’ bowls have been found in eastern Europe from the early third millennium onwards (Rudgley, 1993). These may have been braziers used to burn cannabis for the purpose of intoxication. Some of these bowls are decorated with the impression of coiled rope. This is most likely to have been hemp since it was the most commonly used material for the preparation of fibre. The earliest examples of polypods are found in the east, suggesting an east-west migration of this culture. This conforms to the known direction of the spread of cannabis use. A grave in present day Rumania, dated with certainty to the third millennium BC, was found to contain a cup of charred hemp seeds. 
In the mid 5th century BC, the Greek historian Herodotus described a technique for burning cannabis when he travelled through the Black Sea area of the region known as Scythia (Herodotus, tr. Rawlinson, 1949). Scythia covered a large area stretching from the Ukraine to the borders of present-day India. Its peoples were largely nomadic. Whilst there, Herodotus described the funerary customs of the Scythians: 
After the burial, those engaged in it have to purify themselves, which they do in the following way. First they well soap and wash their heads; then, in order to cleanse their bodies, they act as follows: they make a booth by fixing in the ground three sticks inclined towards one another, and stretching around them woollen felts, which they arrange so as to fit as close as possible: inside the booth a dish is placed upon the ground, into which they put a number of red-hot stones, and then some hemp-seed. 
Hemp grows in Scythia: it is very like flax; only that it is a much coarser and taller plant: some grows wild about the country, some is produced by cultivation: the Thracians make garments which closely resemble linen; so much so, indeed, that if a person has never seen hemp he is sure to think they are linen, and if he has, unless he is very experienced in such matters, he will not know of which material they are. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 5 
The Scythians, as I said, take some of this hemp-seed, and, creeping under the felt coverings, throw it upon the red-hot stones; immediately it smokes, and gives out such a vapour as no Grecian vapour-bath can exceed; the Scyths, delighted, shout for joy, and this vapour serves instead of a water-bath; for they never by any chance wash their bodies with water. 
In the late 1940s, archaeological excavations in Pazyryk in Siberia vindicated Herodotus’ observations of Scythian customs. Two copper vessels were unearthed containing the remains of burned cannabis, together with stones used to heat them, and a tent-frame. The practice was clearly widespread because Siberia, although still 
part of Scythia, is a considerable distance from the Black Sea. Herodotus seemed to interpret the exposure to burning cannabis as a form of cleansing, but the Scythians’ shouting for joy suggests that intoxication occurred during the funeral rite that he witnessed. Perhaps, cannabis caused them to see ‘spirits’, as certain of the ancient Chinese herbals have recorded. Although Herodotus states that cannabis seeds were used, this part of the plant actually contains very little psychoactive component and so cannot have been used to produce the effects described. It is most likely that either lumps of resin were burned and he assumed that these were the seeds of a plant, or that the whole plant was burned and only the seeds survived intact for later inspection. 
A section of Dacian society was known as the kapnobatai, or “smoke walkers”, which may indicate use of cannabis intoxication. Dacia covered part of present day Transylvania and eastern Hungary, and cannabis is known to have been cultivated in 
neighbouring Thrace. Cunliffe has suggested that these elite may have been priests (Cunliffe, 1994). However, Dacia was annexed by the Roman empire in the first century AD and these religious traditions were rapidly suppressed. 
ANCIENT GREECE AND ROME 
The use of cannabis in ancient Greece and Rome has been reviewed in detail by Brunner (1973). ‘Cannabis’ is the Latin word for the hemp plant; in ancient Greek it was written . None of the ancient Greek or Roman writers have described the intoxicating effects of cannabis upon their own citizens. This leads to the conclusion that the populace was either unaware of the intoxicating effects or chose to abstain from them for some reason. It seems unlikely that either civilisation could have been completely ignorant of this property of cannabis, since the plant was widely used at the height of each civilisation for the production of rope and coarse fabric. Perhaps, like the Chinese, cannabis did not suit the Greek or Roman temperament. Both peoples consumed large amounts of wine, and perhaps cannabis was viewed as a less desirable substitute or was taken only occasionally and in private by a select few. If cannabis was used widely it is not credible that it should go unmentioned by all classical writers. Even the more salacious or meticulous classical authors, who do not hesitate to report the depths of debauchery, do not describe it. By contrast, intoxication with alcohol is described by many. 
In modern times, the most popular method of taking cannabis is via smoking, usually mixed with tobacco. The practice of smoking was completely alien to all ancient Europeans, and tobacco, of course, only reached Europe in the sixteenth century. The Scythian manner of burning cannabis in an open brazier under a tent was clearly not very sociable or elegant. It may have been viewed as a primitive 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
6 SIMON WILLS 
custom by the ancient Greeks and Romans who regarded the Scythians as barbarians. For whatever reason, it seems unlikely that this custom was ever widely recognised or copied. The drug could have been taken orally and there seems to be a long tradition of this practice in Persia, Arabia and Egypt, but it is unpleasant to take in this way, unless the taste is heavily disguised with other substances. Furthermore it can take a considerable time for the intoxication to begin after taking cannabis orally; alcohol on the other hand is rapidly absorbed from the stomach. In addition, it is pertinent to recall that cannabis does not provide such a reliable method of intoxication as alcohol, which was very freely available in ancient Rome and Greece and very cheap. The eastern reaches of the Roman Empire included cultures where cannabis was used widely (e.g. Scythia and Arabia). However, there is evidence that even the Scythians eventually found alcohol more to their liking once it was introduced to them (Rudgley, 1993). 
The only definite description of the taking of cannabis for pleasure or intoxication in the classical literature is given by the Greek historian Herodotus during his travels through Scythia (see above). However, in the Odyssey, as related by Homer, Helen adds nepenthe to the wine of her guests after the siege of Troy: 
But Jove-born Helen otherwise, meantime, 
Employ’d, into the wine of which they drank 
A drug infused, antidote to the pains 
Of grief and anger, a most potent charm 
For ills of ev’ry name. Whoe’er his wine 
So medicated drinks, he shall not pour 
All day the tears down his wan cheek, although 
His father and his mother both were dead, 
Nor even though his brother or his son 
Had fall’n in battle, and before his eyes. 
(Homer, 1992 edn) 
The narrative continues by explaining that the drug had been given to Helen by an Egyptian, “For Egypt teems with drugs” . There has been much speculation as to the identity of this substance; some have suggested that it may have been cannabis (Singer and Underwood, 1962; Burton, 1894 edn [a]; Walton, 1938). As the story continues the guests do not become sedated or start to hallucinate, and so presumably the nepenthe was given to promote relaxation and discourse rather than heavy intoxication, sedation or psychotomimetic effects. It has also been suggested that Greek warriors may have taken nepenthe as a courage-boosting intoxicant before charging into the violence of combat (Cooper, 1995). Others have speculated that the ‘wine of the condemned’ cited by the Greek writer Amos in about 700 BC as a method of reducing the pain of a slow death was also cannabis (Walker, 1954). In reality it is impossible to determine the identity of substances such as these from the vague descriptions given. Frequently the events described in the Odyssey, for example, are clearly completely fabricated, and consequently the drugs depicted may also not have been based upon actual substances. The Greeks were aware of a number of psychoactive and sedating preparations apart from alcohol including opium, henbane and mandragora. Any one of these could have been the unknown drugs described by Homer or Amos. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 7 
Most other references to cannabis in the Greek and Roman literature describe the medicinal value of cannabis or its use for producing rope or material. Galen and Ephippus describe how the seeds may be cooked and eaten as a delicacy. Galen possibly hints at the intoxicating powers of cannabis in his description of those who enjoy eating the seeds: 
There are some who fry and consume [the seed] together with other desserts. I call “desserts” those foods which are consumed after dinner in order to stimulate an appetite for drinking. The seed creates a feeling of warmth, and—if consumed in large amounts—affects the head by sending to it a warm and toxic vapour. 
(Brunner, 1973) 
It is possible that Galen misinterpreted what he saw or had described to him (it does not seem to be a first hand account). Some of his contemporaries may have burned cannabis like the ancient Scythians to produce the heady vapour that he mentions. Like Herodotus, he also may have described the parts of the plants used as “seeds” 
through ignorance, when resinous material or the whole plant may actually have been used. 
Pliny the Elder (Gaius Plinius Secundus, c. 23–79 AD) mentions cannabis in his masterwork Naturalis Historia of 77 AD (Pliny, 1950 edn [a]). He classifies hemp as belonging to the “fennel class” since like fennel, dill and mallow, the hemp plant is a tall, upright, rapidly-growing shrub. Lucius Junius Moderatus Columella, also writing in the first century AD, classifies hemp differently. In De Re Rustica he describes it as a “pulse or legume”, together with plants such as the bean, millet, flax and barley (Columella, 1960 edn [a]). Columella carefully describes the method for cultivating hemp: 
Hemp demands a rich, manured, well-watered soil, or one that is level, moist, and deeply worked. Six grains of this seed to the square foot are planted at the rising of Arcturus, which means toward the end of February, about the sixth or fifth day before the Calends of March [ie February 24th or 25th]; and yet no harm will be done in planting it up to the spring equinox if the weather is rainy. 
(Columella, 1960 edn [b]) 
He later explains that although it is possible to estimate the time and manpower required to plant, tend and harvest many related plants, for hemp “the amount of expense and attention required is not fixed”. Presumably this was because the rate of growth and maturity of the plant is greatly affected by climate which varied considerably across the Roman Empire. Pliny also explains briefly how the plant is cultivated, before describing the harvest and preparation of the plant: 
Hemp is sown when the spring west wind sets in; the closer it grows the thinner its stalks are. Its seed when ripe is stripped off after the autumn equinox and dried in the sun or wind or by the smoke of a fire. The hemp plant itself is plucked after the vintage, and peeling and cleaning it is a task done by candle light. The best is that of Arab-Hissar, which is specially used for 
making hunting-nets. Three classes of hemp are produced at that place: that nearest to the bark or the pith is considered of inferior value, while that from the middle, the Greek name for which is “middles”, is most highly esteemed. The second best hemp comes from Mylasa. As regards height, the hemp of Rosea in the Sabine territory grows as tall as a fruit-tree. (Pliny, 1950 edn [b]) 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
8 SIMON WILLS 
Pliny explains that esparto, made from a species of coarse grass, was used as a basic source of fibre at sea “on dry land they prefer ropes made of hemp”, and later he mentions hemp again, reiterating that it is “exceedingly useful for ropes”. Several other Roman and Greek authors mention hemp and its usefulness in the production of rope, including Athenaeus, Apsyrtus, Lucilius and Varro (Brunner, 1973). In volume twenty of the Historia, Pliny describes the medicinal uses of cannabis: 
Hemp at first grew in woods, with a darker and rougher leaf. Its seed is said to make the genitals impotent. The juice from it drives out of the ears the worms and any other creature that has entered them, but at the cost of a headache; so potent is its nature that when poured into water it is said to make it coagulate. And so, drunk in their water, it regulates the bowels of beasts of burden. The root boiled in water eases cramped joints, gout too and similar violent pains. It is applied raw to burns, but is often changed before it gets dry. 
(Pliny, 1950 edn [c]) 
Dioscorides and Galen both mention the ability of cannabis seed to reduce sexual potency and to treat earache. Galen also comments on its value in reducing flatulence. Pseudo-Apuleius advocates use of the herb mixed with grease to treat swelling of the chest, and cannabis mixed with nettle seeds and vinegar for cold sores (Brunner, 1973). 
PERSIA AND ARABIA 
Cannabis has had a long association with Persia and Arabia. Indeed the term “hashish” is Arabian and is taken from the phrase hashish al kief (“dried herb of pleasure”). Several early manuscripts describe the popular use of cannabis for intoxication or medicinal purposes. In the Makhsanul aldawaiya, an ancient Arabic drug formulary, cannabis is described as “a cordial, a bile absorber, and an appetizer, and its moderate use prolongs life. It quickens the fancy, deepens thought and sharpens judgement” (Chopra and Chopra, 1957). In the Herbarium amboinence written in 1095 AD, Rumphius reported that the followers of Mohammed used cannabis to treat gonorrhoea and asthma. Cannabis was also claimed to reduce bile secretion and diarrhoea, and to alleviate the distress of a strangulated hernia (Chopra and Chopra, 1957). 
Sylvester de Sacy collected a series of early medieval Arabian manuscripts which describe the use of hashish. In these the Garden of Cafour, near Cairo, is cited as an infamous location for hashish smoking by fakirs, who wrote poetry to praise the intoxicating properties of the plant. An example of such poetry is given below: 
The green plant which grows in the Garden of Cafour, replaces in our hearts, the effects of a wine old and generous, 
When we inhale a single breath of its odour, it insinuates itself in each of our members and penetrates through the body, 
Give us this verdant plant from the Garden of Cafour, which supersedes the most delicate wine, The poor when they have taken only the weight of one drachm, have a head superb above the Emirs. 
(Walton, 1938a) 
In 1251 the garden was destroyed and the destruction was viewed by many as the work of God, since the taking of cannabis was widely viewed as a form of debauchery. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 9 
The writer Ebn-Beitar wrote about cannabis in the early thirteenth century. He described the low esteem with which cannabis users were viewed: 
People who use it habitually have proved its pernicious effect, it enfeebles their minds by carrying them to manic affections, sometimes it even causes death…I recall having seen a time when men of the vilest class alone dared to eat it, still they did not like the name of ‘takers of hashish’ applied to them. 
(Walton, 1938a) 
Ebn-Beitar describes cannabis as “a revolting excrement”, and in order to illustrate the repugnance with which it was viewed by the ruling classes, he recounts the story of one local leader who attempted to rid his people of the practice of taking hashish: 
L’Emir Soudon Scheikhouni to whom it pleases God to be merciful, wishing to destroy this abuse made investigations in a place named Djoneina…he had dug up all that he found of this abominable plant in these places and arrested the dissolute people who ate this drug; he ordered that the teeth of those who had eaten it be pulled and many were subjected to this ordeal. (Walton, 1938a) 
However, the historian explained that since this event the taking of cannabis became so common, that it was impossible to control either its public usage or the antisocial behaviour that he believed it engendered. 
Hasan about 1260 described how Haider, leader of a holy order of fakirs, happened to eat a sample of the hemp plant whilst out walking because he was hungry. He returned to his brethren with “an air of joy and gayety quite contrary to what we were accustomed to see” and he subsequently encouraged all of his followers to “take little nourishment but chiefly to eat of this herb.” (Walton, 1938a). Another Arabic writer in 1394 described the widespread use of cannabis in the Timbaliere region: 
The use of this cursed plant has become today very common; libertines and feeble-minded people occupy themselves with it to excess and strive to exceed each other in its immoderate usage…without any shame. 
(Walton, 1938a) 
In traditional Mohammedan medicine, or Tibbi, the properties of cannabis have been described as: promoting insanity, causing unconsciousness, weakening the heart, annulling pain, inhibiting secretion of semen and enabling the individual to gain control over ejaculation (Chopra and Chopra, 1957). 
Cannabis is mentioned in Sir Richard Burton’s 1885 translation of the 1001 Tales of the Arabian Nights. This series of mythological tales dates back to at least the 10th century, and is centred on Persia, Arabia and China. In one story, King Omar sedates Princess Abrizah, in order to seduce her, with “a piece of concentrated bhang if an elephant smelt it he would sleep from year to year” (Burton, 1894 edn [b]). In another tale, a thief named Ahmad Kamakim drugs the eunuchs guarding the Caliph’s valuables with hemp fumes (Ibid. [e]). The intoxicating and sedative effects of cannabis are described in several of the other tales (Ibid. [a], [d]). For example in the “Tale of the Kazi and the Bhang-eater”, the Sultan and his vizier observe the Kazi and the Bhang-eater becoming intoxicated with cannabis (Ibid. [a]). The vizier explains to the Sultan: 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
10 SIMON WILLS 
“I conceive that the twain are eaters of Hashish, which drug when swallowed by man garreth him prattle of whatso he pleaseth and chooseth, making him now a Sultan, then a Wasir and then a merchant, the while it seemeth to him that the world is in the hollow of his hand… but whoso eateth it (especially an he eat more than enough) talketh of matters which reason may on no wise represent” Now when they had taken an overdose, they got into a hurly-burly of words and fell to saying things which can neither be intended nor indited. 
In a footnote to the “Tale of King Omar and His Sons”, Burton reveals that cannabis has been used in Arab medicine as an anaesthetic “for centuries before ether and chloroform became the fashion in the civilised West” (Ibid. [e]). He provides further information: 
…[An] anaesthetic administered before an operation, a deadener of pain, like myrrh and a number of other drugs. For this purpose hemp is always used…and various preparations are sold at an especial bazar in Cairo. 
(Ibid. [a]) 
Burton also provides details of the colloquial names for cannabis preparations and fascinating insight into the range of preparations of cannabis used in Arab countries: 
The Arab “Banj” and Hindu “Bhang” (which I use as most familiar) both derive from the old coptic “Nibanj”, meaning a preparation of hemp. 
(Ibid. [a]) 
The Arab “Barsh” or Bars [is] the commonest kind [of hashish]. In India it is called Ma’jun (=electuary, generally); it is made of Ganja or young leaves, buds, capsules and florets of hemp (C. sativa), poppy-seed and flowers of the thorn-apple (Datura) with milk and sugar-candy, nutmegs, cloves, mace and saffron, all boiled to the consistency of treacle, which hardens when cold…These electuaries are usually prepared with “Charas,” or gum of hemp, collected by hand or by passing a blanket over the plant in early morning; it is highly intoxicating. Another aphrodisiac is “Sabzi,” dried hemp-leaves, poppy-seed, cucumber-seed, black pepper and cardamoms rubbed down in a mortar with a wooden pestle, and made drinkable by adding milk, ice cream etc. The Hashish of Arabia is the Hindustani Bhang, usually drunk and made as follows. Take of hemp-leaves, well washed, 3 drams; black pepper 45 grains; and of cloves, nutmeg, and mace (which add to the intoxication) each 12 grains. Triturate in 8 ounces of water, or the juice of water melon or cucumber, strain, and drink. The Egyptian Zabibah is a preparation of hemp-florets, opium, and honey, much affected by the lower orders, whence the proverb: “Temper thy sorrow with Zabibah.” In Al-Hijaz it is mixed with raisins (Zabib) and smoked in the water-pipe. 
(Ibid. [d]) 
In 1298, Marco Polo prepared the story of his 26 years of travelling through the Orient. In it he recounts the middle eastern legend of the “Old Man of the Mountain” who lived in Mulehet in Persia (Bellonci, 1984 edn). He probably passed through this area in 1271–2 near the fortress of Alamut where the Old Man is reputed to have lived. The Old Man was called Alaodin. He created a magnificent, secret garden in an inaccessible valley between two mountains, the entrance to which was guarded by an impregnable fortress. He based his garden on the prophet Mohammed’s vision of Paradise—it was filled with luxurious plants and fruit, golden palaces, splendid artwork, beautiful women and streams of wine, milk and honey. Alaodin selected 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 11 
young men with proven fighting ability and drugged them. They were then carried into the garden and, upon awakening, each believed he was in Paradise. However, a second dose of the drug was used to sedate them and return them to the fortress. Believing him to be a great prophet, the young men begged to be taken back to Paradise and, knowing that they would do anything to return, Alaodin would order them out of the fortress to murder one of his opponents before allowing them back. Any that died in the attempt knew that, after death, they would return to Paradise anyway, and all were happy to do his bidding. 
Many believed that Alaodin’s drug was cannabis. The Alaodin referred to by Marco Polo was one of a number of men who bore the ‘Old Man’ title. All of them were leaders of a sect known as the Neo-Ismailites which was founded in the eleventh century by a Persian, al-Hasan ibn-al-Sabah (d.1124). He became the first to bear the title “Old Man of the Mountain” when his sect captured the mountain fortress of Alamut in 1090. The Neo-Ismailites were not popular with neighbouring cultures, especially devout Muslims, and were given a variety of derogatory names including Hashshashuns (literally “those addicted to hashish” in Arabic) or Hashishiyya (“smokers of hashish” in Syriac). These may have reflected the social practices of the sect’s members, or may have been simply insults (Boye, 1968). Interestingly, in Burton’s translation of the Arabian Nights, cannabis users are always portrayed in a derogatory light. In 1809, Silvestre de Sacy concluded that the garden paradise did not really exist and that it was simply an illusion created by consuming hashish. He further advanced a theory that since the drug used by the Old Man was likely to have been hashish, his group of murderers was known as hashishins. A corruption of this word, de Sacy claimed, gave rise to the western word “assassins” (Rudgley, 1993; Boye, 1968), but this has since been contested. Nonetheless this story was later to have some impact amongst the artistic elite in nineteenth century France. 
INDIA 
The earliest record of cannabis in Indian literature is found in the Atharva Veda which may have been written as early as 2000 BC. ‘Bhang’ is referred to briefly. However, it is unclear whether this is a direct reference to cannabis or another sacred plant (Chopra and Chopra, 1957). Cannabis was known in India at least as early as 1000 BC because “bhanga” is mentioned in the Susruta, which dates to this period. It is advocated for the treatment of catarrh accompanied by diarrhoea, excess production of phlegm and biliary fever (O’Shaughnessy, 1839; Walton, 1938; Chopra and Chopra, 1957). The medicinal qualities of cannabis are described in more detail in the Rajanirghanta edited by Narahari Pandita in 300 AD. The drug was recommended as a soothing, astringent preparation which could reduce the production of phlegm, stimulate the appetite, boost the memory and alleviate flatulence (Chopra and Chopra, 1957). Indian surgeons may have used cannabis as an anaesthetic, as did those in ancient China. Another very early use for cannabis was to promote valour and allay fear in warriors about to do battle. 
The Tajni Guntu, an early materia medica has been ascribed to the fourteenth century AD (O’Shaughnessy, 1839). Cannabis is described in this source as a promoter of success, and a giver of strength. Other effects described include a reeling gait, laughter and excitement of sexual desire. Garcia da Orta, a Hindu physician, gave an 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
12 SIMON WILLS 
account of the social use of cannabis in 1563. He described the use of the plant to produce intoxication, cause hallucinations, increase appetite, allay anxiety, promote merriment and induce sleep. Other works of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, 
such as the Dhurtasamagama and Bhavaprakash mention similar indications. Cannabis formed an important part of the herbal armamentarium of traditional Hindu medicine, known as Ayuverdic. It has been used for treating the conditions already alluded too, namely: bowel disorders, reduced appetite, insomnia, reticence of speech and sadness (Chopra and Chopra, 1957). 
However, cannabis has also been taken to induce intoxication for many centuries. In 1659 Aurangzeb, Emperor of India, attempted to deal decisively with the abuse of cannabis which he regarded as a vice. He regarded himself as a champion of pure Islam and a censor of public morals, and shortly after his coronation he forbade the cultivation of “bhang” throughout his realm (Dodwell, 1974). However, this was a short-lived prohibition which was virtually impossible to enforce. 
In 1839, Dr W.B.O’Shaughnessy published a monograph “On the Preparations of the Indian Hemp, or Gunjah” . O’Shaughnessy was employed at the Medical College of Calcutta by the British East India Company. His paper was a summary of all the data that he could gather about the plant, and much of this information concerned usage in India. The various types of cannabis used in India are described below: 
Sidhee, subjee, and bang (synonymous) are used with water as a drink…540 troy grains are well washed with cold water, then rubbed to powder, mixed with black pepper, cucumber and melon seeds, sugar, half a pint of milk, and an equal quantity of water…Gunjah is used for 
smoking alone—one rupee weight, 180 grains, and a little dried tobacco are rubbed together with a few drops of water…The Majoon, or Hemp confection, is a compound of sugar, butter, flour, milk and sidhee or bang. 
In 1893–4, the British Government, conscious of the powerful influence of cannabis in Indian Society, commissioned the seven volume Indian Hemp Drug Commission Report. This described in detail the history of cannabis use in India and the utilisation of the drug by natives at the time of publication. The report concluded that: 
The evidence shows the moderate use of ganja or chara not to be appreciably harmful, while in the case of bhang drinking, the evidence shows the habit to be quite harmless. The excessive use does cause injury…[it] tends to weaken the constitution and to render the consumer more susceptible to disease…Moderate use of hemp drugs produces no injurious effects on the mind…excessive use indicates and intensifies mental instability. 
(Walton, 1938b) 
The government of India took the view that cannabis was so much a part of Indian society that it would be impossible and unreasonable to ban it. 
In a very detailed account of the uses of cannabis in India in 1957, Chopra and Chopra reviewed the medicinal applications of the drug. Traditional indications for the use of cannabis by the various indigenous populations of India included: digestive disorders, diarrhoea, cholera and dysentry, colic, malarial fever, nervous diseases, insomnia, mania, epilepsy, hysteria, gonorrhoea, urethritis, reduced appetite, gout, rheumatic diseases, migraine, dysmenorrhoea, cough, asthma, bronchitis, oliguria, dysuria, pain and heat stroke. In addition, cannabis was applied externally to treat 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 13 
open wounds, haemorrhoids, conjunctivitis, orchitis, erysipelas and toothache. Cannabis was also used as a prophylactic against malaria and cholera. The authors described the method for smoking cannabis: 
The equipment for smoking differs in various parts of the country, most widely used being a simple earthenware chillum similar to that used by the poorer classes for smoking tobacco, resembling a funnel with a wide base and a long neck. In addition to this, the smoker must have a brazier, a pair of tongs and a piece of cloth to be wrapped round the neck of the funnel. The method is simple. The ganja is first moistened with a little water to soften it and is then 
placed in the palm of the left hand and kneaded with the thumb and forefinger of the right hand to a pulpy mass. An amount of tobacco, a little less than the ganja, is then placed inside the chillum, the prepared ganja being placed on top of it. The usual practice is to put the kneaded ganja (or charas) between two thin pieces of broken earthenware, thus preventing the rapid combustion of the drug by the ignited charcoal and helping to reduce the temperature of the smoke, which might otherwise be too hot. A piece of glowing charcoal or smouldering cow-dung cake is placed with a pair of tongs on the chillum thus prepared. A piece of moistened cloth is then wrapped round the neck of the chillum, which is held between the palms of the hands. The mouth is applied to the opening formed between the thumb and forefinger of the right hand and the smoke is inhaled deeply into the lungs. The smoke is retained in the lungs for as long as possible and is then allowed to escape slowly through the nostrils, the mouth being kept shut. The longer the smoke is retained, the more potent are the effects obtained. Experienced smokers are able to retain the smoke for quite a long time. 
Apart from the chillum method of smoking described above, ganja and charas are also smoked in the ordinary hookah or hubble-bubble, in which smoke is allowed to bubble through water before being inhaled. 
The drug was also claimed to focus the mind for the purpose of meditation, and was, of course, also taken to promote pleasurable intoxication and as an aphrodisiac. For all these purposes cannabis was commonly adulterated with a variety of substances designed to enhance its psychotropic effects (e.g. strychnine from Nux vomica, alcohol, Datura, opium). A particularly interesting and widespread use of cannabis described by Chopra and Chopra is the taking of cannabis to promote endurance: 
Cannabis drugs are reputed to alleviate fatigue and also to increase staying power in severe physical stress. In India, fishermen, boatmen, laundrymen and farmers, who daily have to spend long hours in rivers, tanks and waterlogged fields, often resort to cannabis in some form, in the belief that it will give them a certain amount of protection against catching cold. Mendicants who roam about aimlessly in different parts of India and pilgrims who have to do long marches often use cannabis either occasionally or habitually. Sadhus and fakirs visiting religious shrines usually carry some bhang or ganja with them and often take it. It is not unusual to see them sitting in a circle and enjoying a smoke of ganja in the vicinity of a temple or a mosque. Labourers who have to do hard physical work use cannabis in small quantities to alleviate the sense of fatigue, depression and sometimes hunger. 
Veterinary uses of cannabis included the promotion of bovine lactation, the disinfection of sheep pens, the treatment of intestinal worms, and a general tonic for bullocks. It was even employed as an aphrodisiac for mares prior to mating. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
14 SIMON WILLS 
SOUTH AMERICA 
It is clear that the use of cannabis has gradually and progressively spread both east and west from the original indigenous area in central Asia. However, the most intriguing details concerning the historical spread of cannabis usage have come from South America. In 1993, a team of German anthropologists published the results of an analysis of various tissues from seventy-two Peruvian mummies dated 200–1500 AD (Parsche et al., 1993). Bones from twenty of them were shown to contain cannabinoids. In the same study, ten bodies from the German Bell Culture (2500 BC) did not contain cannabinoids. In addition, two African mummies from the Sudan (dated at 5000–4000 BC and 400–1400 AD) also did not contain cannabis. 
Cannabis is not native to the Americas, suggesting that there may have been some contact between South America and Asia or Egypt in antiquity. Assuming the results of the Peruvian mummy analysis are correct, it is difficult to explain them without conjecturing that some form of transatlantic communication must have occurred before the arrival of Columbus (Moore, 1993). Until this information came to light, it was generally assumed that hemp was introduced to Chile by the Spanish during their conquest of 1545 onwards. Use of cannabis in South America is known to have been boosted by the arrival of African slaves in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 
EUROPE AFTER 500 AD 
From earliest times, hemp was the basic commodity used for the manufacture of the ropes and rigging of sailing vessels in Europe. Often the ropes were impregnated with tar to render them waterproof and make them more durable. 
Hildegard of Bingen mentions the analgesic properties of cannabis in the Physica published in the twelfth century. Peter Schoofer discusses the therapeutic properties of the drug in his herbal printed in Mainz in 1485. He advocated use of the plant in various guises as an analgesic, and to treat gastrointestinal disorders, oedema and as a plaster for boils (Mechoulam, 1986). 
Cannabis, opium and alcohol were some of the less well known ingredients used by the European witch cult of the late middle ages in association with the more widely recognised solanaceous “hexing herbs” (Rudgley, 1995). 
The cannabis plant has formed part of the culture and folklore of several eastern european countries for centuries. This may be because eastern europeans have been more reliant on the plant than those from the west, and cannabis has also had a longer history of association with the east. In the Ukraine, for example, cannabis harvested on St John’s Eve was thought to deter evil actions (Richardson, 1988). Slavs from the south of Europe believed that the appearance of cannabis on a wedding day foretold future marital harmony and contentment. Consequently, cannabis seeds were thrown after the ceremony, and the bride was encouraged to brush the walls of her house with the plant. In Poland, the hemp dance was performed on Shrove Tuesday. Sometimes the seeds were eaten on special occasions. In Poland and Lithuania, cannabis seed soup has traditionally been prepared on Christmas Eve, and in Latvia and the Ukraine the seed is eaten on Three Kings’ Day. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 15 
ENGLAND BEFORE 1800 
The earliest record of the use of hemp in Britain comes from seeds found in a Roman well in York. The finding of large tracts of pollen in parts of East Anglia indicate that hemp was grown there throughout the Anglo-Saxon period (Wild, 1988). The British climate of the period would not have supported even a reasonable harvest of resin, so the plants must have been grown for fibre production. There is one reference to the medicinal use of cannabis during this period—it is mentioned as an ingredient in an Anglo-Saxon herbal, the Lacnunga, where it is called haenep (Grattan and Singer, 1952). Usually it is the resin that is used medicinally, rather than other parts of the plant, and this must have been imported. 
The playwright, William Shakespeare, does not mention the intoxicating or medicinal properties of cannabis in any of his works, although he does refer to its value for the production of rope on several occasions. For example in Henry V, reflecting a tradition that hemp was used to produce the hangman’s noose, Pistol declares: 
Let gallows gape for dog, let man go free, 
And let not hemp his wind-pipe suffocate. 
(Henry V, Act iii, Scene vi, line 45–6) 
Other Tudor and Jacobean writers discuss the therapeutic value of cannabis in some detail. William Turner produced “The New Herbal” in 1528. In it, he describes the properties of Cannabis as follows: 
Of Hempe: Cannabis named both of the Grecians and latines, is called in English hempe, in Duche hanffe, in French chanure. Hemp sayeth Dioscorides, is profitable for many things in mans lyfe, and especially to make strong cables and roopes of. It hath leaves like an Ashe tree, with a strong sauour [savour], longe stalkes and round sede. 
The herbals of three other Englishmen were widely known during the seventeenth century. John Gerard first published “The Herbal or Generall Historie of Plantes” in 1597 but it was reprinted several times; John Parkinson published “The Theater of Plantes, an Universall and Compleate Herbal” in 1640, and Nicholas Culpeper produced his “English Physician and Complete Herbal” in 1653. All three publications explain the medicinal value of cannabis. Their accounts are based largely on the works of Greek and Roman authors such as Pliny, Galen and Dioscorides with little new information. They are remarkably similar. Culpeper’s herbal is perhaps the most famous, and the complete entry for hemp is given below: 
This is so well known to every good housewife in the country, that I shall not need to write any description of it. 
Time It is sown in the very end of March, or beginning of April, and is ripe in August or September. 
Government and virtues It is a plant of Saturn, and good for something else, you see, than to make halters only. The seed of Hemp consumes wind, and by too much use thereof disperses it so much that it dries up the natural seed for procreation; yet, being boiled in milk and taken, helps such as have a hot dry cough. The Dutch make an emulsion out of the seed, and give it with good success to those that have the jaundice, especially in the beginning of the disease, if there be no ague accompanying it, for it opens obstructions of the gall, and causes digestion of choler. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
16 SIMON WILLS 
The emulsion or decoction of the seed stays lasks and continual fluxes, eases the cholic, and allays the troublesome humours in the bowels, and stays bleeding at the mouth, nose, or other places, some of the leaves, being fried with the blood of them that bleed, and so give to them to eat. It is held very good to kill the worms in men or beasts; and the juice dropped into the ears kills worms in them; and draws forth earwigs, or other living creatures gotten into them. The decoction of the root allays inflammations of the head, or any other parts: the herb itself, or the distilled water thereof doth the like. The decoction of the root eases the pains of the gout, the hard humours of the knots in the joints, the pains and shrinking of the sinews, and the pains of the hips. The fresh juice mixed with a little oil or butter, is for any place that hath been burnt with fire, being thereto applied. 
(Culpeper, 1653) 
Parkinson offers some interesting additional information. He, like Culpeper and Gerard, suggests that hemp is useful to kill worms in “man or beast”, but intriguingly he adds that a decoction of hemp “powred into the holes of earthwormes, will draw 
them forth, and fishermen and anglers have used this feate to get wormes to baite their hookes” (Parkinson, 1640). He also quotes Matthiolus: 
…as Matthiolus saith, the women in Germany went a wrong course, to give their children the decoction of Hempe seeds for the falling sickness [ie epilepsy], which it did rather augment, then helpe to take away…Matthiolus saith that Hempe seede, given to Hennes in the winter, when they lay fewest egges, will make them lay more plentifully. 
Robert Burton, an English clergyman, mentions cannabis in his study entitled “The Anatomy of Melancholy” which he published in 1621. He proposed cannabis as a treatment for depression. John Quincy in the English Dispensatory of 1728 reported 
that the seeds of hemp “are claimed to abate venereal desires and jaundice”, but this was the first publication to doubt the veracity of these traditional uses: “there is no authority which has justified their being included in prescriptions.” The New English Dispensatory of 1764 advocated the application of the root of the cannabis plant to treat inflammation of the skin, while the Edinburgh New Dispensatory of 1794 submitted that cannabis seed had been used to treat coughs and “heat of urine” (presumably cystitis), and might also restrain venereal appetites (Lewis, 1794). The author noted, however, that the value of cannabis in ameliorating the symptoms of these conditions was not borne out by experience and that “other parts of the plant may be considered as deserving further attention”. The updated version of this publication from 1804 described hemp succinctly; “smell weak, taste mawkish, effects emmollient, anodyne” (Duncan, 1804). The term ‘anodyne’ usually indicated an analgesic effect. 
FRANCE IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 
In France, in the 1840s, cannabis was used by Dr Jacques Joseph Moreau (‘Moreau de Tours’) in an attempt to treat mental illness. He probably first took the drug himself whilst travelling in Arab countries during his youth. However, from the beginning of the 19th century, cannabis was also brought back to France by Napoleonic soldiers returning from the east. French physicians accompanying the army to the east had seen the unusual properties of the resin and had used it to combat pain amongst the 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 17 
soldiers. Moreau’s colleague, Louis Albert-Roche, had produced a book in 1840 in which he claimed that cannabis was an effective treatment for plague. Moreau himself published several papers describing the successful use of cannabis to alleviate symptoms of mental illness. 
His most famous publication was Du Hachisch et de l’Alienation Mentale; Etudes Psychologiques (Hashish and Mental Illness; Psychological Studies). This was published in 1845. He introduces the second chapter as follows: 
At first, curiosity led me to experiment upon myself with hashish. Later, I readily admit, it was difficult to repress the nagging memory of some of the sensations it revealed to me. But from the very outset I was motivated by another reason. 
I saw in hashish, or rather in its effect upon the mental faculties, a significant means of exploring the genesis of mental illness. I was convinced that it could solve the enigma of mental illness and lead to the hidden source of the mysterious disorder that we call “madness”. (Moreau, 1973 edn [a]) 
Moreau obtained cannabis as imports from French possessions in the east, but he also grew the plant in Paris (Siegel and Hirschman, 1991). In himself he reported that cannabis produced symptoms akin to an acute psychotic state and, in Egypt, Moreau had observed that chronic, excessive use could cause symptoms similar to the mental illnesses that he later studied in institutions in France. 
Anyone who has visited the Orient knows how widely used hashish is, especially among the Arabs, who have developed no less pressing a need for it than the Turks and Chinese for opium or the Europeans for alcoholic beverages. 
(Moreau, 1973 edn [b]) 
Moreau describes the effect of cannabis intoxication upon himself at great length, including detailed accounts of a series of bizarre hallucinations and illusions. At one point he writes: 
Twenty times I was on the verge of indiscretion, but I stopped myself, saying, “I was going to say something, but I must remain quiet.” I cannot describe the thousand fantastic ideas that passed through my brain during the three hours that I was under the influence of the hashish. 
They seemed too bizarre to be credible. The people present questioned me from time to time and asked me if I wasn’t making fun of them, since I possessed my reason in the midst of all that madness. 
(Moreau, 1973 edn [b]) 
He is keen to suggest that cannabis may have therapeutic value, but does not exaggerate the significance of his published observations: 
Unfortunately, I have only a few cases to present, and I am not ready to assert that these cases can justify any opinion concerning the effectiveness of extract of Indian hemp upon a specific mental illness. 
(Moreau, 1973 edn [c]) 
Edmond DeCourtive, a pharmacist and student of Moreau, began to experiment with hashish in 1847. He formulated cannabis resin into highly concentrated pills 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
18 SIMON WILLS 
and supplied them to Moreau and colleagues. He is also credited with writing the first thesis on hashish, a complete copy of which has recently come to light (Siegel and Hirschman, 1991). In it he describes, in a charmingly youthful style, the effects of cannabis administration on animals: 
Jays, magpies, sparrows, canaries are relaxed and sad and do not eat. Music awakens and animates them a great deal. Geese are anxious and dazed.…Dogs, besides showing greater agility and extreme good humour, are greatly impressed by music, much more so than in the normal state. 
(Siegel and Hirschman, 1991) 
He also recounted the story of a friend whom he found under the influence of the drug: “he was laughing so hard that he made me laugh and he laughed even harder” The friend cried “I am too happy; I want some hashish; give me enough to die!”. 
Shortly after the publication of his most renowned work Moreau, together with the writer Théophile Gautier, established Le Club des Haschischins in about 1846. It was heavily inspired by Marco Polo’s tale of Alaodin and the Assassins from six centuries before (Rudgley, 1993). Le Club met initially amidst the decaying splendours of the Hôtel Pimodan in Paris, and later in the apartments of Roger de Beauvoir, a wealthy Parisian socialite. At various times, members of Le Club included literary figures such as Gérard de Nerval, Honoré de Balzac, Hector Horeau and Alexandre Dumas, as well as Boissard de Boisdenier the painter and Charles Baudelaire the poet. 
Dumas evokes beautifully the spirit and atmosphere of Le Club des Haschischins in his classic novel ‘The Count of Monte-cristo’, published in 1844–5. In it, the Count tempts a young visitor to try the cannabis that he holds before him in a silver cup: 
Are you a man of imagination—a poet? taste this, and the boundaries of possibility disappear; the fields of infinite space open to you, you advance free in heart, free in mind, into the boundless realms of unfettered reverie. Are you ambitious, and do you seek after the greatness of the earth? taste this, and in an hour you will be a king, not a king of a petty kingdom hidden in some comer of Europe like France, Spain or England, but king of the world, king of the universe, king of creation; without bowing at the feet of Satan, you will be king and master of all the kingdoms of the earth…when you return to this mundane sphere from your visionary world, you would seem to leave a Neapolitan spring for a Lapland winter—to quit paradise for earth— heaven for hell! taste the hashish, guest of mine,—taste the hashish! 
(Dumas, 1936 edn) 
The visitor is persuaded to try the drug and then: 
with his eyes closed upon all nature his senses awoke to impassable impressions, and he was under the painful yet delicious enthralment produced by the hashish… 
In 1858 Baudelaire published ‘The Poem of Hashish’. In it he briefly describes the history of cannabis use, the effects of the drug upon himself and his friends, and discusses the moral, psychological and philosophical impact of cannabis use. He 
explains that “hashish reveals to the individual nothing except himself” (Baudelaire, 1950 edn) and that although the drug stimulates imagination and creative thinking it is a spur to deep thought and philosophy, not a substitute for it: “what hashish gives 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 19 
with one hand it takes away with the other: that is to say, it gives power of imagination and takesaway the ability to profit by it.” He warns that: 
“It is said, and is almost true, that hashish has no evil physical effects; or, at worst, no serious ones. But can it be said that a man incapable of action, good only for dreaming, is truly well, even though all his members may be in their normal condition?…hashish, like all other solitary 
delights, makes the individual useless to mankind, and also makes society unnecessary to the individual.” 
(Baudelaire, 1950 edn). 
The taking of cannabis seems to have been uncommon in France outside the circles of the Parisian artistic elite. In the rest of Europe and the US, cannabis abuse was similarly rare. Opium, tobacco and alcohol were much more popular. Cannabis was a drug with interesting pharmacological properties, but no clear-cut medical uses. Throughout the nineteenth century it was never regarded as a ‘drug of abuse’. 
VICTORIAN BRITAIN 
Samuel Gray’s Supplement to the Pharmacopoeia and Treatise on Pharmacology, published in 1833, noted that the juice of the cannabis plant could be made into an “agreeable inebriating drink” which would “produce fatuity”. The dried leaves, Gray noted, could be used as tobacco. This is the first hint of cannabis use for intoxication in the British literature. 
Cannabis was brought to the attention of the western medical profession formally by O’Shaughnessy’s paper of 1838 in the Bengal Medical Journal. The opening paragraph of his paper highlights the lack of interest in cannabis amongst Europeans of the time: 
But in Western Europe, its use either as a stimulant or as a remedy, is equally unknown. With the exception of the trial, as a frolic, of the Egyptian ‘Hasheesh’, by a few youths in Marseilles, and of the clinical use of the wine of Hemp by Mahneman…I have been unable to trace any notice of the employment of this drug in Europe. 
(O’Shaughnessy, 1838) 
O’Shaughnessy administered cannabis to animals and described the effects produced. His conclusion from this experimentation was that the drug did not appear to be harmful, but that not all animals were affected equally: 
It seems needless to dwell on the details of each experiment; suffice it to say that they led to one remarkable result—That while carnivorous animals, and fish, dogs, cats, swine, vultures, crows, and adjutants [=storks], invariably and speedily exhibited the intoxicating influence of the drug, the graminivorous, such as the horse, deer, monkey, goat, sheep, and cow, experienced but trivial effects from any dose we administered. 
O’Shaughnessy administered cannabis to several human subjects and claimed success in alleviating symptoms in a small number of cases of rheumatism, cholera, tetanus and infantile convulsions. He also used it as a sedative in an incurable case of rabies. He described the intoxication (“delirium”) arising from “incautious use of hemp preparations…especially among young men first commencing the practice.” His observations are reproduced below: 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
20 SIMON WILLS 
The state is at once recognized by the strange balancing gait of the patient’s; a constant rubbing of the hands; perpetual giggling; and a propensity to caress and chafe the feet of all bystanders of whatever rank. The eye wears an expression of cunning and merriment which can scarcely be mistaken. In a few cases, the patients are violent; in many highly aphrodisiac; in all that I 
have seen, voraciously hungry. 
A blister to the nape of the neck, leeches to the temples, and nauseating doses of tartar emetic with saline purgatives have rapidly dispelled the symptoms in all the cases I have met with, and have restored the patient to perfect health. 
However, it was not only in the colonies of the British Empire that the intoxicating powers of cannabis came to the attention of doctors. In 1845, DeQuincey described the case of a Scottish farmer who found the taking of cannabis much to his liking: 
One farmer in Midlothian was mentioned to me eight months ago as having taken it, and ever since annoyed his neighbours by immoderate fits of laughter; so, that in January it was agreed to present him to the sheriff as a nuisance. But for some reason the plan was laid aside; and now, eight months later, I hear that the farmer is laughing more rapturously than ever, continues in the happiest frame of mind, the kindest of creatures and the general torment of the neighbourhood. 
(Walton, 1938c) 
In 1850, David Urquhart, an English Member of Parliament described his experience of cannabis intoxication whilst travelling through Morocco: 
Images came floating before me—not the figures of a dream, but those that seem to play before the eye when it is closed…The music of the wretched performance was heavenly, and seemed to proceed from a full orchestra…I was following a new train of reasoning; new points would occur, and concurrently there was a figure before me throwing out corresponding shoots like a zinc tree… 
(Walton, 1938c) 
Edward Birch, a British doctor based in Calcutta in 1887, described the use of cannabis to cure chloral or opium addiction. He reported two cases where cannabis was successful and was surprised by the “immediate action of the drug in appeasing the appetite for the chloral or opium” . He advocated further research, but concluded with a warning: 
Upon one point I would insist—the necessity of concealing the name of the remedial drug from the patient, lest in his endeavour to escape from one form of vice he should fall into another, which can be indulged in any Indian bazaar… 
(Birch, 1889) 
In the Lancet of 15th March 1890, a correspondent, identified only as “W.W.”, reported the ill effects of the drug on himself after taking it to treat neuralgic pains. The experience was extremely unpleasant, consisting of delusions of sensory deprivation, partial paralysis, anxiety, hysteria and suicidal ideation. Not surprisingly the correspondent was “determined never again to take cannabis”. He concluded: “I may state that I experienced no pleasurable intoxication or feeling of happiness, but the very reverse” (W.W., 1890). Awareness by British doctors that cannabis could be taken to provoke ‘pleasurable intoxication’, suggests that the drug was already taken 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 21 
for this purpose in Victorian England by a minority. Indeed, Sir Richard Burton, in a footnote to The Arabian Nights, written in 1885, notes that: 
I heard of a “Hashish-orgie” in London which ended in half the experimentalists being on their sofas for a week. The drug is useful for stokers, having the curious property of making men insensible to heat. 
(Burton, 1894 edn [c]) 
I have smoked it and eaten it for months without other effect than a greatly increased appetite and a little drowsiness. 
(Burton, 1894 edn [f]). 
The letter from “W.W.” in the Lancet prompted a famous reply from Dr J.Russell Reynolds, Queen Victoria’s physician (Reynolds, 1890). He explained that contrary to W.W.’s experience, “Indian hemp, when pure and administered carefully, is one of the most valuable medicines we possess.” Reynolds gave details of medical conditions which he had treated with cannabis including senile dementia, neuralgia, migraine, cramps, asthma, non-classical epilepsy and dysmenorrhoea. Conditions which he found were not amenable to cannabis included mania, sciatica, tinnitus, dystonias and chronic epilepsy. He concluded his letter as follows: 
…the object of this communication will be attained if, by giving my experience of the great value of Indian hemp, my brethren may be deterred from abandoning its use by any dread of its causing “toxic effects”, unless it be given in a “toxic” dose. 
One year later, a letter in the British Medical Journal reported the value of cannabis for treating “insanity…brought on usually by mental worry”, depression, mania, migraine, gastric ulceration, insomnia and “chorea when arsenic fails” (Anon., 1891). Cannabis, like so many medicaments in Victorian England, was used to treat a wide variety of disparate conditions, often in a most inappropriate and illogical manner. One writer, for example explains that: 
The most popular and in many respects the most effectual remedies for corns are those containing salicylic acid. In these, extract of Indian Hemp [Cannabis] is generally found—why, it is difficult to say, but it gives a nice colour and acts faintly as a sedative. The original formula…came from Russia in 1882. 
(MacEwan, 1901) 
The benefits of sedation in the treatment of corns is not generally recognised today. The first account in the British medical literature of the adverse consequences of cannabis taken deliberately for abuse are described by Foulis in the Edinburgh Medical 
Journal of 1900. He relates the story of two brothers who took a large dose of cannabis to investigate its intoxicating effects. One brother (referred to as ‘A’) became very depressed as a result of taking the preparation, the other (‘B’) became exhilarated, boisterous and almost manic (“it was impossible to get B to do anything else than dance and sing and talk”). In a description of their admission to the local infirmary in a highly intoxicated state, brother A later recounted: 
We were then handed over to the nurse. I am afraid that she did not look upon us in a very favourable light, although I tried to impress upon her that it was an extremely interesting 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
22 SIMON WILLS 
experience. Indeed, it was with difficulty that I could persuade anyone that we had not been taking the common drink. 
In 1925, attempts were made via the League of Nations to limit the widescale use of cannabis largely because of an alleged association with insanity in Egypt. Consequentiy trade in cannabis was restricted by the International Opium Convention. However, cannabis abuse in the UK continued to be rare until after World War II. It is known that cannabis was imported into the country for coloured seamen and entertainers in London in the late 1940s (Zacune and Hensman, 1973). The spread of cannabis use was fuelled because of its association with the increasingly popular jazz scene, and because many of the immigrants entering Britain at this time had used the drug in their countries of origin. Usage was encouraged by avant garde literary figures of the era. As in the USA, it was not until the 1960s that cannabis smoking became fashionable with young white people, and it has remained popular ever since. Cannabis abuse was made illegal in the UK in 1964 and at the time of writing is subject to the Misuse of Drugs Act (1971). Around 15–30% of teenagers have taken cannabis and it accounts for 80–90% of drug-related offences dealt with by the police. In 1990, there was estimated to be one million cannabis users in the UK, a figure which does not differ significantly from mid-1980s estimates. 
CANNABIS AND NORTH AMERICA 
The British navy used hemp extensively for the manufacture of ropes and rigging in the seventeenth century, but UK farmers were unwilling to grow the plant because it was believed to deprive the soil of nutrient. In addition, hemp demanded time consuming preparation, which was also unpleasant due to the smell produced by the retting process. Consequently, the British Government tried to persuade settlers in Virginia and Maryland to grow cannabis to meet the navy’s demand, but this measure 
met with only limited success because tobacco was a much more profitable crop. The hemp industry became more important during the American Revolution, when fibre was difficult to obtain from Europe, but production declined rapidly after the Civil War due to spiralling labour costs and the preferential use of alternative types of fibre such as cotton. In the Midwest, particularly, hemp was still grown for a while as a source of birdseed. Throughout this period of cannabis farming, the plant gradually escaped the confines of farmland and began to grow in the wild. In Nebraska it was estimated in 1969 that there was approximately 150,000 acres of wild hemp growing (Richardson, 1988). 
In 1854, Bayard Taylor recounted his experiences under the influence of cannabis whilst taking a holiday in Damascus. He had on a previous occasion taken a small dose whilst in Egypt which produced a pleasurable experience “so peculiar in its character, that my curiosity instead of being satisfied, only prompted me the more to throw myself, for once wholly under its influence” (Walton, 1938c). Unfortunately, he inadvertently took a rather large overdose and suffered an experience which although initially pleasurable and controlled, rapidly became very frightening. 
The spirit (demon, shall I not rather say?) of Hasheesh, had entire possession of me…My perceptions now became more dim and confused. I felt that I was in the grasp of some giant 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 23 
force; and in the glimmering of my fading reason, grew earnestly alarmed, for the terrible stress under which my frame labored increased every moment…By this time it was nearly midnight. I had passed through the Paradise of Hasheesh, and was plunged at once into its fiercest hell… Every effort to preserve my reason was accompanied with a pang of mortal fear, lest what I now experienced was insanity, and would hold mastery over me forever…” 
It took several days for Bayard Taylor’s alarming reaction to completely resolve. He later wrote of his subsequent dependence upon cannabis. It became a daily habit which lasted four or five years. He was only released from his compulsion when overtaken by a fever in Syria. 
While the sickness continued, I could not take the hasheesh; and when I recovered, I had so far gained my self-control, that I resolved to fling the habit aside forever. 
In 1857, another American, Ludlow, published accounts of his experiences of cannabis intoxication. He reported effects which were frightening, pleasant or enlightening. In one magazine article he described the manner in which cannabis intoxication could act as a form of revelation: 
How is it that the million drops of memory preserve their insulation, and do not run together in the brain into one fluid chaos of impression?…How does spirit communicate with matter, and where is their point of tangency?…Problems like these, which have been the perplexity of all my previous life, have I seen unravelled by hasheesh, as in one breathless moment the rationale of inexplicable phenomena has burst upon me in a torrent of light. (Walton, 1938c) 
In many respects the rise in cannabis use in the USA followed a similar course to that seen in the UK. The first reference to cannabis abuse in a major medical publication appeared in the Boston Medical and Surgical Journal of 1857. John Bell described the effects of the drug upon himself and suggested as Moreau did before him, that cannabis, by producing symptoms similar to a manic state, “may in a degree serve as a key to 
unlock some at least of the mysteries of mental pathology”. Throughout the late 19th century the drug was used in the US to treat a variety of disparate medical conditions. In 1860, a committee of the Ohio State Medical Society published a report on the medical uses of cannabis. Information was provided on its use to treat puerperal psychosis, various pains (inflammatory, neuralgic, abdominal), gonorrhoea, cough and so forth. One of the contributors, Dr Fronmueller, compared cannabis favourably to opium as an analgesic. He suggested that although cannabis was a less reliable and less potent analgesic, the side effect profile was better. Unlike opium, cannabis did not reduce appetite, produce constipation, cause nausea or vomiting, affect lung function and “the nervous system is also not so much affected” (McMeens, 1860). Cannabis smoking for pleasure was probably introduced to the US on a wide scale by immigrant Mexican agricultural labourers. However, in an “anthropological footnote” to his translation of the Arabian Nights, written in 1885, Burton discusses the taking of cannabis to produce intoxication: 
I found the drug well known to the negroes of the Southern United States and of Brazil, although few of their owners had ever heard of it. 
(Burton, 1894 edn [b]) 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
24 SIMON WILLS 
Whether the Afro-Caribbeans’ knowledge was based on experience from their native lands, or whether they acquired it subsequent to arrival (presumably from Mexican labourers) is unclear. The word ‘marihuana’ is the term predominantly used in the 
US today to describe cannabis. It is derived from the Mexican-Spanish marijuana, the original meaning of which is now obscure. Initially, it may have been used to describe rough grade tobacco (Bowman and Rand, 1981). It has also been suggested that the word is derived from the Portuguese maran guango meaning “intoxication” (Brunner, 1973). By the time that cannabis began to be abused more widely for its intoxicating effects, the medical usage had declined considerably. By 1942, cannabis was no longer listed in the United States Pharmacopoeia. 
From the immigrant agricultural community, cannabis use soon spread to the jazz scene (Musto, 1991). Throughout the 1930s there were almost frenetic anti-cannabis crusades, public education drives, newspaper campaigns and police actions against suppliers and users alike. Possession, sale and administration of the pharmacologically active parts of the cannabis plant was eventually made illegal by Public Law Number 238 on 2nd August 1937. This is commonly referred to as the Marihuana Transfer Tax Law or Marihuana Tax Act. In 1938, Robert Walton, Professor at the Mississippi School of Medicine, wrote of the growing popularity of indulging in cannabis intoxication which “is currently expanding among the idle and irresponsible classes of America and Russia and which has maintained itself for centuries among the more dissolute populations of the East” (Walton, 1938a). He further explained that: 
Marihuana smoking in the United States is a development which has taken place almost entirely within the last 20 years. In fact, the epidemic proportions of this vice have only become manifest in the last 5 or 10 years. 
As in Europe, it was not until the 1960s that cannabis use became very widespread. Legal restrictions were extended to the isolated active principle (tetrahydrocannabinol) in 1968. In 1970, the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act was introduced. However, by the early 1970s, US tolerance of the drug was such that a Presidential Commission in 1972 recommended ‘decriminalisation’ of cannabis. In 1973, Oregon was the first state to rescind legislation which prohibited the personal 
use of cannabis. Subsequently many states issued similar laws. These State Laws do not allow users to grow cannabis. In 1977, President Carter’s government supported legalised possession of small amounts of the drug (Musto, 1991). Since then the popularity of cannabis in the US has waxed and waned, but not all new laws have been in favour of liberalisation—in 1990, for example, the people of Alaska voted to re-criminalise the possession of cannabis. 
Cannabis is used extensively in the West Indies. It is thought to have been introduced there by workers arriving from India, and elsewhere in Asia, during the mid-1800s. The drug is particular popular with the Rastafarian culture in Jamaica, who attribute divine power to it, although many other West Indians also use the drug (Edwards et al., 1982). 
THE ANALYSIS OF CANNABIS 
Throughout the nineteenth century various attempts were made to isolate and purify the psychoactive constituents of cannabis. The first chemical analysis of the resin 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 25 
was probably undertaken by Tscheepe in 1821 and this was followed by a large number of other studies (Mechoulam, 1973). None of these was successful in isolating a single active principle, probably because investigators usually assumed that the substance would be an alkaloid like most other plant-derived drugs known at the time. Knowledge of analytical chemistry and the available technology was also primitive—most investigations relied on fractional distillation of resin dissolved in numerous different solvents. Various alkaloids were isolated, and nicotine was even proposed as the active constituent (Hay, 1883). This was quickly refuted by others who pointed to the common practice of mixing cannabis with tobacco for smoking. 
In 1899 Wood et al. isolated a crude liquid from which they later separated cannabinol. This was the first cannabinoid to be isolated in pure form. It was initially claimed to be the major pharmacologically active component, despite an apparently low yield. Subsequent research became confused by the inability to repeat this work and, in many cases, a failure to realise that extracts assumed to be pure were, in reality, often mixtures of several chemicals with different pharmacological properties, but similar chemical properties and structure. 
In 1965 Mechoulam and Gaoni isolated delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol (“delta-1- THC”) amongst a group of other constituents using chromatography. The chemical structure was elucidated and, in 1970, it was shown to be psychoactive in rhesus monkeys (Mechoulam et al., 1970). 
Since 1965, a revision of nomenclature has meant that delta-1-THC is now known as delta-9-THC. It is known to be the main psychoactive constituent of cannabis resin, and is usually referred to simply as “THC”. 
REFERENCES 
Anon. (1891), On the therapeutic value of Indian hemp, Br. Med. J. (4th July), II, 12. Baudelaire, C. (1950), The Poem of Hashish, In My Heart Laid Bare and Other Prose Writings, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London, pp. 75–123. 
Bell, J. (1857), On the haschisch or Cannabis indica, Boston Medical and Surgical journal, 56(11), reprinted in J. Substance Abuse Treatment2 (1985), pp. 239–243. Bellonci, M. (1984 edn), tr. Waugh, T., The Travels of Marco Polo, Book Club Associates, London, Ch. XLI-XLIII, pp. 38–39. 
Birch, E.A. (1889), The use of Indian hemp in the treatment of chronic chloral and chronic opium poisoning, Lancet (30th March), I, 625. 
Bowman, W.C. and Rand, M.J. (1980), Cannabis, In Textbook of Pharmacology, Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 42.43–42.61. 
Boyle, J.A. (1968), The Cambridge History of Iran, Cambridge University Press, London, p. 443 and pp. 453–4. 
Burton, R.F. (1894 edn [a]), The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night, Nichols & Co, London, Vol. I, p. 65 (footnote). 
Burton, R.F. (1894 edn [b]), Ibid., Vol. II, p. 25–27. 
Burton, R.F. (1894 edn [c]), Ibid., Vol. II, p. 315–6. 
Burton, R.F. (1894 edn [d]), Ibid., Vol. III, p. 159 (footnote). 
Burton, R.F. (1894 edn [e]). Ibid., Vol. III, p. 196–7. 
Burton, R.F. (1894 edn [f]), Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 14–30. 
Chopra, I.C., and Chopra, R.N. (1957), The use of the cannabis drugs in India, Bull. Narcotics, 9, 4–29. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
26 SIMON WILLS 
Columella, L.J.M. (1960 edn [a] tr. Boyd), On Agriculture, Heinemann, London, Vol. I, Ch. 7, v. 1, p. 139. 
Columella, L.J.M. (1960 edn [b] tr. Boyd), Ibid., Vol. I, Ch. 10, v. 21, p. 169–70. Cooper, P. (1995), Herbs of Homer, Pharm. J.,255, 898–900. 
Creighton, C. (1903), On indications of the haschish vice in the Old Testament, janus, 8, 241 and 297. 
Culpeper, N. (1653), The Complete Herbal, Petert Cole, London, p. 128–9. Cunliffe, B. (1994), Oxford Illustrated Prehistory of Europe, OUP, Oxford, p. 405. Dodwell, H.H. (1974) (ed.), The Cambridge History of India, Cambridge University Press, London, Vol. IV, p. 230. 
Dumas, A. (1936 edn), The Count of Monte-Cristo, Odhams Press, London, Vol. 1, Ch. 31, pp. 301–306. 
Duncan, A. (1804), Edinburgh New Dispensatory, Bell and Bradfute, Edinburgh, p. 363. Edwards, G., Arif, A. and Jaffe, J. (1982), Jamaica: Contrasting patterns of cannabis use, In Drug Use and Misuse—Cultural Perspectives, Croom Helm, London, pp. 70–73. Foulis, J. (1900), Two cases of poisoning by Cannabis indica, Edinburgh Medical Journal, 8, 202–210. 
Grattan, J.H.G. and Singer, C. (1952), Anglo-Saxon Magic and Medicine, Oxford University Press, London, p. 84 and p. 123. 
Gray, S.F. (1833), Supplement to the Pharmacopoeia and Treatise on Pharmacology, Underwood, London, p. 36. 
Guthrie, D. (1946), A History of Medicine, Thomas Nelson and Sons, London p. 36. Hay, M. (1883), A new alkaloid in cannabis indica, Pharm. Journal, June 2nd, pp. 998–999. Herodotus tr. Rawlinson, G. (1949) The History of Herodotus, Everyman’s Library, J.M. Dent & Sons, London, Vol. 1, Book IV, Ch. 73–75, pp. 315–316. 
Homer (1992 edn), The Odyssey, tr. Cowper, W., J.M. Dent & Sons, Everyman’s Library, London, Book IV, Lines 275–284, p. 53. 
Lewis, Dr. (1794), Edinburgh New Dispensatory, Edinburgh Press, Bell and Bradfute, Edinburgh, p. 126. 
MacEwan, P. (1911), Pharmaceutical Formulas, Being “The Chemist and Druggist’s” Book of Useful Recipes for the Drug Trade, Chemist and Druggist, London, p. 824. Mechoulam, R. and Gaoni, Y. (1965), J. Amer. Chem. Soc.,8, 3273. 
Mechoulam, R., Shani, A., Edery, H. and Grunfield, Y. (1970), Science,169, 611. Mechoulam, R. (1973), Cannabinoid Chemistry, In Marijuana—Chemistry, Pharmacology, Metabolism and Clinical Effects, Mechoulam, R. (ed.), Academic Press, London, pp. 1–29. 
Mechoulam, R. (1986), The Pharmacohistory of Cannabis sativa. In Mechoulam, R. (ed.), Cannabinoids as Therapeutic Agents, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, pp. 1–19. Mechoulam, R., Devane, W.A., Breuer, A., Zahalka, J. (1991), A random walk through a cannabis field, Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav.,40, 461–464. 
McMeens, R.R. (1860), Report of the committee on Cannabis indica, Transactions of Fifteenth Annual Meeting of the Ohio State Medical Society, Follet, Foster and Co., Columbus, USA, pp. 75–100. 
Moore, N. (1993), Drugs in ancient populations (letter), Lancet, 341, 1157. Moreau, J.J. (1973 edn [a]), Hashish and Mental Illness, Peters, H. and Nahas, G.G. (eds.), tr. Barnett, G.J., Raven, New York, Ch. 2, p. 15. 
Moreau, J.J. (1973 edn [b]), Ibid., Ch. 1, pp. 1–14. 
Moreau, J.J. (1973 edn [c]), Ibid., Ch. 7, pp. 205–226. 
Musto, D.F. (1991), Opium, cocaine and marijuana in American history, Scientific American, July, 20–27. 
Nunn, J.F. (1996), Ancient Egyptian Medicine, British Museum Press, London, p. 156. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
CANNABIS USE AND ABUSE BY MAN 27 
O’Shaughnessy, W.B. (1838), On the preparations of the Indian hemp or Gunjah, Transactions of the Medical and Physical Society of Bengal (1838–40), pp. 421–461. 
Parkinson, J. (1640), The Theater of Plantes—an Universal and Compleate Herbal, Cotes, London, p. 42. 
Parsche, F., Balabanova, S. and Pirsig, W. (1993), Drugs in ancient populations (letter), Lancet, 341, 503. 
Pliny (1950 edn [a] tr. Rackham), Natural History, Heinemann, London, Vol. V, Book XIX, Ch. XXII, p. 461. 
Pliny (1950 edn [b] tr. Rackham), Ibid., Ch. LVI, p. 531–3. 
Pliny (1950 edn [c] tr. Rackham), Ibid., Book XX, Ch. XCVII, p. 153. 
Prioreschi, P. and Babin, D. (1993) Ancient use of cannabis (letter), Nature, 364, 680. Quincy, J. (1728), Pharmacopoeia Officinalis et Extemporanea or A Compleat English Dispensatory, A.Bell, London, p. 226. 
Reynolds, J.R. (1890), Therapeutical uses and toxic effects of Cannabis indica, Lancet (22nd March) I, 637–8. 
Richardson, P.M. (1988) Flowering Plants—Magic in Bloom, Burke Publishing Co., London, pp. 32–50. 
Rudgley, R. (1993), The Alchemy of Culture, British Museum Press, London, pp. 28–37. Rudgley, R. (1995), The archaic use of hallucinogens in Europe: an archaeology of altered states (editorial), Addiction, 90, 163–4. 
Siegel, R.K. and Hirschman, A.E. (1991), Edmond Decourtive and the first thesis on hashish: a historical note and translation, J. Psychoactive Drugs,23, 85–86. 
Singer, C. and Underwood, E.A. (1962), A Short History of Mediane, Clarendon Press, Oxford, p. 341. 
Turner, W. (1568), New Herball, Arnold Birckman, Cologne, p. 105. 
Twitchett, D. and Loewe, M. (1986), Cambridge History of China (Volume 1), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, p. 589. 
Walker, K. (1954), The Story of Medicine, Hutchinson, London, p. 207. Walton, R.P. (1938a), Chapter 1. In Walton, R.P., Marihuana America’s New Drug Problem, J.P. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia, pp. 1–18. 
Walton, R.P. (1938b), Ibid., p. 142. 
Walton, R.P. (1938c), Ibid., p. 56–114. 
Wild, J.P. (1988), Textiles in Archaeology, Shire Publications, Aylesbury, UK, p. 22. Wilson, E.H. (1913), A Naturalist in Western China with Vasculum, Camera and Gun (Volume II), Methuen, London, p. 81. 
Wood, T.B., Spivey, W.T.N., Easterfield, T.H. (1899), J. Chem. Soc., 75, 20. W.W. (1890), Toxic effects of Cannabis indica, Lancet, (15th March), I. 
Zacune, J. and Hensman, C. (1971), Drugs Alcohol and Tobacco in Britain, Heinemann, London, pp. 95–101. 
Zlas, J. et al. (1993), Early medical use of cannabis (letter), Nature, 363, 215. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
2. THE CANNABIS PLANT: BOTANY, CULTIVATION 
AND PROCESSING FOR USE 
AMALA RAMAN 
Department of Pharmacy, Kings College London, UK 
Cannabis plants have been cultivated in Europe, Asia, Africa and the Americas for hundreds, perhaps even thousands of years as a source of three main products— hemp fibre, cannabis seeds and medicinal or narcotic preparations (Fairbairn, 1976). Hemp fibre is obtained from cannabis stems, and has been used over the centuries for the production of textiles, rope and sacking. It is strong and durable, composed of about 70% cellulose and reaches lengths of 3–15 feet (Schultes, 1970). The fibre has been used in the past to make paper, and has been proposed as a replacement for wood pulp in modern paper production (Kovacs, 1992). However, there are many technological limitations to be overcome before this becomes a commercially viable proposition (Judt, 1995). The “seeds” (which technically are the fruit or achene) may be roasted and consumed by man, used as birdseed or anglers’ bait or pressed to yield a greenish yellow, fixed oil which has been used in foodstuffs and in varnishes, paints and soap (Schultes, 1970; Fairbairn, 1976). Cannabis leaves and flowering tops and preparations derived from them have many pharmacological effects in man, including narcotic properties; the latter is the most widely known use of cannabis in the present day. 
GEOGRAPHICAL ORIGIN OF CANNABIS 
The history of cannabis is complex and it has not been possible to ascribe a precise geographical origin to the plant. The picture is complicated by a long history of human use of cannabis in many parts of the world, doubts over the distinction between wild, cultivated and escaped types, extensive transfer of its use and cultivation between cultures and the existence of much variety in the physical and chemical properties of the plant (Schultes, 1970). There is general agreement however, that cannabis is Asiatic in origin, but locations ranging from the Caspian Sea and Central and Southern Russia to Northern India and the Himalayas have been proposed as its native habitat (Schultes, 1970). Of these, an area of Central Asia just North of Afganisthan is favoured by most experts (Schultes and Hoffman, 1980). 
TAXONOMY AND NOMENCLATURE OF CANNABIS 
The botanical classification of cannabis plants has been the subject of much debate and repeated alteration since the time of Linnaeus (late 18th Century). Controversy 
29 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
30 AMALA RAMAN 
has surrounded both the family in which the genus Cannabis is placed, and the question of whether the genus is mono—or polytypic (i.e. consisting of one or many species). A number of authors have dealt extensively with this subject (Schultes, 1970; Small and Cronquist, 1976; Schultes and Hoffman, 1980). The history of cannabis taxonomy and nomenclature is briefly reviewed in this section. 
In Europe cannabis had been grown from ancient times for the production of hemp fibre. Gerarde in his 1597 Herball lists the following common European names for the plant: hempe (English), kemp (Brabanders), zarner hanff (Dutch), canape (Italian), cananio (Spanish), chanvre (French), kannabis (Greek) and cannabis (Latin). 
The first recorded use of the Latin binomial Cannabis sativa was by Caspar Bauhin in 1623 (Schultes, 1970), but the official publication of this name was in Linnaeus’s Species Plantarum of 1753, the internationally acknowledged starting point for modern botanical nomenclature. The species name Cannabis is stated by Bloomquist (1971) to mean “canelike” whilst the genus name “sativa” has the meaning “planted or sown” and signifies that the plant is propagated from seed and not from perennial roots. 
In 1785, Lamark assigned the Latin binomial Cannabis indica to cannabis grown in India, classifying it as a unique species on the basis of its different growth habit, morphological characteristics and stronger narcotic properties than the European plant. However many taxonomists regarded the plant as a variety of Cannabis sativa using the nomenclature Cannabis sativa var. indica (Schultes and Hoffman, 1980) to distinguish it from the fibre hemp. In colloquial language the term “Indian hemp” was coined and still persists as a name for narcotic cannabis. 
In 1924, Janischevsky described a wild form of the fibre type of cannabis found in Western Siberia and Central Asia, which could be distinguished from the cultivated form on the morphological characteristics of the seed (achene). He assigned the domesticated or cultivated form to the species C sativa and named the wild type C. ruderalis or C. sativa var. ruderalis. Similarly, Vavilov and Bukinich (1929) described a wild form of narcotic cannabis growing in eastern Afganistan, and described this as C. indica var. kafiristanica. Thus distinctions were made based on both narcotic potential and morphological variations observed at different levels of domestication. 
There are divergent views as to whether the numerous forms of Cannabis observed are variations of a single species or distinct species in their own right. An examination of entries in Index Kewensis from 1893–1990 reveals that many species, subspecies and varieties of Cannabis have been proposed during this period (C. chinensis, erratica, foetens, lupulus, macrosperma, americana, generalis, gigantea, ruderalis, intersita and kafiristanica), but that many of these have subsequently come to be regarded as equivalent to C. sativa. However many Russian botanists have held the view that several species do exist within the genus (Schultes and Hoffman, 1980). Morphological and microscopical differences between C. sativa, C. indica and C. ruderalis plants have been observed, and following extensive literature, herbarium and field studies, Schultes and co-workers at the University of Mississippi declared in 1974 their support for the Russians’ view that the three should be delimited as distinct species (Schultes and Hoffman, 1980). The need to resolve the issue assumed some importance in the 1970s since the identity of cannabis samples had to be clarified for criminal proceedings against those involved in its abuse as an intoxicant. National and state laws in the 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 31 
United States of America defined marijuana specifically as Cannabis sativa, and consequently any other Cannabis species could not technically be considered illegal. The most extensive consideration of cannabis taxonomy to date is that published by Small and Cronquist in 1976. Based on an examination of the literature relating to chemical factors, plant and achene morphology, as well as the influence of selection of characteristics through cultivation over centuries, they concluded that Cannabis sativa is a single but highly variable species. Two subspecies, namely C.sativa subsp. sativa and C. sativa subsp. indica, of low and high narcotic potential respectively were proposed and each subspecies was further classified into cultivated and spontaneous (wild) varieties as follows: 
C. sativa subsp. sativa var. sativa (cultivated) 
C. sativa subsp. sativa var. spontama (spontaneous) 
C. sativa subsp. indica var. indica (cultivated) 
C. sativa subsp. indica var. kafiristanica (spontaneous) 
A taxonomic key was given to identify the four varieties, and synonyms of each listed to show relationships to previously published species names (Table 1). Further chemotaxonomic evidence for a single Cannabis species was provided by Lawi-Berger 
and Kapetanidis (1983) and their co-workers (Lawi-Berger et al., 1983a,b) who showed that the type and proportion of fatty acids, as well as the proteins and enzymes present in cannabis seeds from 14 different geographical locations were virtually identical. 
At a higher level of classification, the genus Cannabis belongs to the family Cannabaceae (often erroneously rendered Cannabinaceae, Cannabidaceae or even Cannaboidaceae) of the order Urticales; this too has been the subject of debate. Taxonomists had initially placed the plant in Urticaceae (the nettle family), but in the early part of this Century there was some support for classifying it under Moraceae (the fig family) (Schultes, 1970). Both are families in Urticales and Cannabis has 
Table 1 Synonyms of Cannabis sativa subspecies and varieties according to Small and Cronquist (1976) 
C. sativa Linn, subsp. sativa var. sativa Small et Cronq. 
C. sativa var. vulgaris Alefield; C. chinensis Delile; C. sativa chinensis A. DC.; C. gigantea Delile, C. sativa var. gigantea Alefield; C. gigantea Crevost, C. sativa  vulgaris A. DC; C. sativa   pedemontana A. DC; C. sativa var culta Czern.; C. sativa subsp. culta Serebr.; C sativa var. praecox Serebr.; C. sativa var. monoica Hol.; C. generalis Krause; C. americana Houghton et Hamilton. 
C. sativa subsp.sativa var. spontaneaVavilov 
C. sativa var. spontanea Czernj.; C. sativa subsp. spontanea Serebr.; C. ruderalis Janisch.; C. sativa var. ruderalis Janisch. 
C. sativa subsp.indica var. indica (Lam.) Wehmer 
C. sativa var. indica; C. macrosperma Stokes; C sativa kif A. DC.; C. sativa  forma afghanica Vav.; C. indica var. kafiristanica forma afghanica Vav. C. sativa subsp.indica var. kafiristanica (Vavilov) Small et Cronq. 
C. indica Lam. var. kafiristanica Vav. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
32 AMALA RAMAN 
some features of each, but also sufficiently significant differences to prevent it being placed with confidence in either. Morphological and chemical studies led to the creation, in the 1960s, of the distinct family Cannabaceae which contains two genera 
only—Cannabis and Humulus (hop plants). Table 2 shows the larger view of the taxonomical position of Cannabis within the plant kingdom, with classifications above the level of species as described by Quimby (1974) and subspecies as classified by Small and Cronquist (1976). 
The establishment of the family Cannabaceae has obtained widespread support, but the debate over whether or not Cannabis is a monotypic genus has not been satisfactorily resolved. Small and Cronquist’s classification is not universally accepted and support for a polytypic view of the genus still exists as evidenced by the comments of Schultes and Hoffman (1980) and subsequent entries in Index Kewensis (1976– 1990). Nevertheless, the tendency in recent literature is to refer to all types of cannabis as Cannabis sativa L. with an indication of the fibre or narcotic characteristics of the plant. As Schultes and Hoffman (1980) point out, divergent definitions of what constitutes a distinct species are largely to blame for the controversies that have arisen in the classification of Cannabis. A second important factor is the extensive cultivation and selection of high yielding strains of the plant (fibre or narcotic) over many centuries giving rise to a wide range of phenotypes. The development of modern analytical techniques and easier access to material from different parts of the world has led to a substantial body of work on the chemical variation of cannabis plants, particularly in relation to whether the plants are predominantly fibre type or drug type, and the factors influencing this property. Chemical variation in Cannabis is discussed in more detail in Chapter 3. 
Table 2 Taxonomic classification of Cannabis, (based on the descriptions of Quimby (1974) and Small and Cronquist (1976)) 
Kingdom: Plant 
Division: Tracheophyta 
Subdivision: Pteropsida 
Class: Angiospermae 
Subclass: Dicotyledoneae 
Superorder: Dilleniidae 
Order: Urticales 
Family: Cannabaceae 
Genus: Cannabis 
Species: sativa 
Subspecies: C. sativa L. subsp. sativa (L.) Small et Cronquist. 
C. sativa subsp. indica (Lam.) Small et Cronquist. 
Varieties: C. sativa L. subsp. sativa (L.) Small et Cronquist var. sativa (L.) Small et Cronquist, Taxon 25 (1976) 421. 
C. sativa L. subsp. sativa (L.) Small et Cronquist var. spontanea Vavilov, 
Taxon 25 (1976) 423. 
C. sativa L. subsp. indica (Lam.) Small et Cronquist var. indica (Lam.) 
Wehmer, Die Pflanzenstoffe (1911) 248. 
C. sativa L. subsp. indica (Lam.) Small et Cronquist var. kafiristanica 
(Vavilov) Small et Cronquist, Taxon 25 (1976) 429. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 33 
BOTANICAL FEATURES OF CANNABIS 
Despite the debate over the mono or polytypic status of the genus Cannabis, all cannabis plants are easily recognised by certain distinct common botanical characteristics. Early herbals (Dodonaeus, Gerarde) speak of two types of cannabis— the seed bearing type and the barren type, which reflect the fact that the plant is dioecious i.e. that it bears male and female flowers on separate plants (Figure 1). The male plant bears staminate flowers and the female plant pistillate flowers which eventually develop into the fruit and seeds. In the early herbals the sexes were in fact erroneously assigned, with the plant bearing seeds referred to as seede hempe, male hempe or Cannabis mas and the plant bearing flowers alone referred to as barren hempe, female hempe or Cannabis femina. 
Occasionally monoecious plants are encountered bearing both male and female flowers; these may arise as a result of special breeding (Small and Cronquist, 1976). They are particularly frequent in varieties developed for hemp production (Clarke, 1981). Feminisation of male plants using ethephon (Ram and Sett, 1982a) and masculinisation of female plants with silver nitrate and silver thiosulphate complex (Ram and Sett, 1982b) have been reported, and irradiation (Nigam et al., 1981a) or treatment with streptovaricin (Nigam et al., 1981b) can also induce changes in flower formation. An interesting observation was that in a collection of wild cannabis plants 
Figure 1 Male (left) and female (right) plants of Cannabis sativa L. Photograph courtesy of Professor R.Brenneisen, University of Bern 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
34 AMALA RAMAN 
growing along streets and highways in the United States, only 41% were male as compared to 55% of all plants collected from varying sites for the study (Haney and Bazzaz, 1970). It has been demonstrated (Heslop-Harrison, 1957) that exposure to low levels of carbon monoxide for short periods of time can cause a shift of sex expression from male to female. 
Information published elsewhere (Stearn, 1970; Schultes and Hoffman, 1980; Bloomquist, 1971; Clarke, 1981: pp. 1–10), gives detailed technical descriptions of cannabis morphology; the information has been simplified in the present text. Cannabis plants have tap roots, about one-tenth the length of the stalk, and with small branches diversifying out from the main root. Above ground, the plants vary in 
height from 1–20 feet (1–6 m). Up to the flowering season, plants of both sexes have a similar appearance, although the male plants may be more slender than the females which tend to be somewhat stocky. The stems are angular and furrowed, sometimes 
hollow and can be either branched or unbranched, depending on the proximity of neighbouring plants. Both sexes have compound, green leaves composed of 3–15 leaflets or blades with toothed margins. The leaflets are arranged in a palmate fashion, i.e. radiating from a single point at the end of a stalk. At the base of the stem, the leaves are arranged in pairs, but this changes to an alternate, spiral arrangement, generally with an increasing number of leaflets in the upper parts. The leaflets are 6– 11 cm long and between 2 to 15mm wide. Variations in leaf shape within this broad description have been recorded (Clarke, 1981: p. 89). 
Often the sex of the plant is only determinable at the onset of flowering, when the distinct male and female flowers emerge. The two types of inflorescence are easily distinguished. The male inflorescence is composed of many individual flowers borne on flowering branches up to 18cm long and stands out from the leaves. The individual flowers are small, consisting of 5 whitish or greenish sepals less than 5 mm in length and containing 5 pendulous stamens. By contrast the female inflorescences, do not project beyond the surrounding leaves and are formed in the axillae or terminals of branches. They are compact, short and contain only a few flowers grouped in pairs. Each flower consists of an ovary surrounded by a green bract (the calyx) which forms a tubular sheath about 2mm in length around the ovary. Two stigmata project out of this sheath. Following fertilisation, the ovary (containing a single ovule) develops into a thin wall surrounding a single seed with a hard shell. This sort of fruit is technically termed an achene, In practice the whole fruit is regarded as the “seed” known as hempseed or cannabis seed. The achene is 2.5–5 mm long and slightly less in width. 
Virtually every aerial part of the cannabis plant is covered in minute hairs or trichomes. These are either simple hairs (covering trichomes) or glandular trichomes (Figure 2) containing a resin. Five main types of trichomes have been identified (Fairbairn, 1976; Turner et al., 1981a) and described (Clarke, 1981: p. 97). These are: 
(a) long, unicellular, smooth, curved, covering trichomes; 
(b) more squat, unicellular, cystolith covering trichomes, containing calcium carbonate; 
(c) bulbous, glandular trichomes; 
(d) capitate-sessile (i.e. without a stalk), glandular trichomes, and (e) capitate-stalked, glandular trichomes. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 35 
Figure 2 Resin-containing capitate-stalked trichomes on a pistillate bract of Cannabis sativa L. Photograph courtesy of Professor R.Brenneisen, University of Bern 
Types (a)-(d) are found on the vegetative leaves and pistillate bracts, while type (e) is found on the bracts and floral leaves only (Hammond and Mahlberg, 1977; Turner et al., 1981a). The capitate glandular trichomes have been shown to contain cannabinoids, the unique phytochemicals found in cannabis, some of which are responsible for the intoxicant properties of the plant (Fairbairn, 1972; Turner et al., 1977, 1978). Within the trichomes, the cannabinoids form a resinous substance. This is present in secretory sacs which consist of a distended area bounded by a sheath, formed between secretory cells of the trichome (Lanyon et al., 1981). Cannabinoids are not found in the non-glandular (covering) trichomes (Malingré et al., 1975). 
It has been shown that the density of capitate sessile and bulbous glands on the pistillate bract decreases as the bract matures, whereas that of capitate stalked glands increases (Turner et al., 1981b). In leaf development however, bulbous and sessile capitate gland density remains virtually unchanged (Turner et al., 1981a). In both leaves and bracts, the density of non-glandular trichomes show an overall decrease in density over time (Turner et al., 1981 a, b). A comparison of the cannabinoid content and total numbers of glands in the two organs reveals differences. During bract development, the total number of capitate glands, total cannabinoid content and cannabinoid content per unit dry weight increases (Turner et al, 1981b). However, in the leaf, although total numbers of capitate glands and total cannabinoid content per leaflet increase, the concentration of cannabinoids decreases during leaf maturation 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
36 AMALA RAMAN 
(Turner et al., 1981 a). These studies further strengthen the association between the glandular trichomes and cannabinoid content. 
Glandular trichomes of cannabis have been used as a diagnostic agent in identifying the plant material by microscopy when more gross morphological characteristics are not discernable (e.g. in a fragmented leaf). Corrigan and Lynch (1980) have carried out extensive experiments to find a suitable staining agent which will allow cannabis to be distinguished from other plant materials that may have trichomes of a similar appearance. Fast Blue B was found to be a highly selective stain for the cannabinoids in the trichomes of Cannabis sativa, having no effect on the trichomes of over two hundred other plant species tested. The stalked capitate trichomes of the bract have a characteristic appearance, being 130–250 m in length, and having either a multicellular or unicellular stalk and 8–16 cells in the head (Evans, 1989; Bruneton, 1995). The cystolithic covering trichomes of cannabis, although unusual, are not sufficiently unique to the species to be of diagnostic value (Thornton and Nakamura, 1972). 
GROWTH CYCLE OF CANNABIS 
Cannabis is an annual herb, which grows during the warm season, and then dies down, with new generations springing up from seed the following year. It can grow in any sort of soil, even when nutrition is poor (Bloomquist, 1971), although for commercial purposes good soils are required since cannabis is a heavy feeder and can deplete the soil of nutrients (Schultes, 1970). It has been observed that mature seeds from domesticated varieties of cannabis are larger and germinate more readily than those of wild plants (Janischevsky, 1924). Seeds usually germinate within 3–7 days of sowing (Clarke, 1981: p. 1), and under favourable conditions, the height of the plant can increase by as much as 7 cm per day (Clarke, 1981: p. 2). 
Flowering is usually initiated at a critical daylength (photoperiod), which varies depending on the strain of the plant (Clarke, 1981: p. 3). As cannabis is usually dioecious, male and female flowers are produced on separate plants and pollination is reported to occur mainly by the agency of wind (Bloomquist, 1971). The male plants die down soon after pollination whilst the females survive until the onset of inclement weather (frost in temperate areas and drought in the tropics). However, female plants kept indoors are reported to survive for many years (Anon., 1972). Seeds mature towards the end of the warm season and both man and birds are important in their dispersal (Haney and Bazzaz, 1970). 
The maturation time for cannabis varies from two to ten months (Anon., 1972). Typically in the Northern hemisphere, cannabis seeds would be sown in May and the plants harvested in September (Bloomquist, 1971). Brenneisen and Kessler (1987), studying cannabis cultivation in Switzerland, have described early and late maturing ecotypes of cannabis. Early maturing forms (“Bolivia” and “Italia”) generally originate in temperate zones or at higher altitudes in the subtropics e.g. from the Andes, Atlas, and Himalaya mountain ranges where vegetation time is limited. They have thick and feather-like leaves. Female flowers are produced in mid August, with male flowers appearing four to eight weeks before this. Maturation of the fruit occurs from mid September to mid-October. The late maturing ecotypes (“Hellas”, “Africa I” and 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 37 
“Africa II”) originate from tropical or subtropical zones such the Caribbean, Central America, California, Africa and Asia. They have thinner leaves, and produce flowers between mid-September and the end of October. They can only be made to bear mature fruit in European countries if grown under artificial heat and lighting conditions. The pattern of production of 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the main narcotic cannabinqid, also differs in the two ecotypes. In the early maturing forms, THC concentrations in the plant are relatively low initially and peak at the time of seed ripening. By contrast, levels of THC in vegetative parts of the plant are generally higher in the late maturing types, peak towards the end of the vegetative growth and begin to decrease in the reproductive phase. This latter type is favoured by growers seeking to produce cannabis for narcotic purposes. Rosenthal (1984) has reviewed the maturation period and general characteristics of narcotic cannabis varieties from around the world. 
Cannabis is reported to have few natural enemies other than man (Bloomquist, 1971). It is generally resistant to weather change, although heavy frosts may destroy it. Established cannabis plants are able to control the growth of competing weeds, possibly through the agency of volatile terpenes and sesquiterpenes produced by the plant (Haney and Bazzaz, 1970). Young cannabis plants are unable to produce terpenes and may become smothered by surrounding weeds if not controlled. Pests attacking cannabis include the root parasite, branched broom rape, which has been known to cause some damage in European plants (Haney and Bazzaz, 1970). In India, young plants of the drug crop are reported to be prone to wilt disease caused by Sclerotium rolfsii Sacc. whilst the hemp crop may suffer leafspot disease caused by Phomopsis cannabina Curzi, and infestation by cut worms (Anon., 1992). 
CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS 
History of Cannabis Cultivation 
The histories of the main uses of cannabis can be traced separately but are inevitably linked as a result of the intermingling of knowledge from diverse cultural streams. Archaeological evidence suggests that the use of cannabis can be traced back at least 6000 years (Anon., 1972) and specimens have been found in a 3000–4000 year old Egyptian excavation site (Schultes, 1970). 
Schultes (1970) states that cannabis as a source of hemp fibre was probably introduced into Western Europe from the East at different times and by different invaders. Hempen cloth, estimated to have survived from about 6000 years ago, has been excavated from sites in Europe and samples of hemp seeds, leaves, textiles and rope dating to between 500 BC and 300 AD have been found in Germany and England (Schultes, 1970). Pollen evidence shows increasing cultivation of cannabis in England from the early Anglo-Saxon era to the Norman period (Godwin, 1967). The cultivation and processing of hemp in eastern England during medieval times is also suggested by pollen and fossil evidence (Bradshaw et al., 1981). The fibres were apparently obtained by a process known as “water-retting” in which bundles of mature stems were placed in deep ponds of standing water (retting pits) to allow rotting of the tissue surrounding the fibres (Bradshaw et al., 1981). There is evidence for similar 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
38 AMALA RAMAN 
cultivation and processing of cannabis in Central Wales during the Tudor period (French and Moore, 1986). 
The cultivation of hemp spread to the Americas following the influx of European colonists. It was introduced to South America by the Spanish in 1545, to Canada in 1606 by Louis Hébert, apothecary to the French explorer Samuel de Champlain (Anon., 1972), and to New England by the pilgrims from England. Hemp cultivation in North America was actively encouraged by both France and England in order to supply both European and local American demand. By 1630, cannabis had become a staple crop on the East Coast of North America. Thus until relatively recently, the predominant use of cannabis in the West was as a source of hemp, with the narcotic and medicinal uses only being recognised following contact with Asian and Northern African cultures to whom these properties were well known (Kalant, 1968). 
In Asia, the pharmacological effects of cannabis had been discovered in ancient times and the plant was used for medicinal, narcotic and ceremonial purposes. Early writings (Anon., 1972) on the effects of the herb include the medicinal treatise of the legendary Chinese Emperor, Shen Nung (ca 2700 BC, although there is some dispute about the date and authorship of the text), the ancient Atharvaveda of India (pre 1400 BC) and the Zend-Avesta of Northern Iran (ca 600 BC). Herodotus (ca 450 BC) described the use of cannabis in funeral rites of the Scythians, who occupied an area near the Black Sea. The herb (Emboden, 1972) or seeds (Schultes, 1970) were thrown onto heated stones and the vapour inhaled as a post-funeral purification rite. A similar method of use has been reported in the pre-Portuguese era among people living in the Zambezi valley of Africa, where vapours from a smouldering pile of cannabis would be inhaled either directly or through reeds. The incorporation of cannabis-based rituals into important social ceremonies is believed by some anthropologists to indicate a long period of contact with the herb. The use of cannabis as an euphoriant is thought to have spread from India to the Middle East and then to North Africa (Kalant, 1968). 
Although Galen (130–200 AD) recorded the intoxicating effects of excessive consumption of hemp cakes (Schultes and Hoffman, 1980), in Western Europe the narcotic properties of cannabis do not appear to have been widely known until relatively recently. The German Schöffer in the “Latin Herbarius” of 1474 lists numerous medicinal uses such as clearing scales from the head, growing hair, aiding digestion, analgesia and drying up the sperm, but makes no mention of any psychoactive effects (Nigg and Seigler, 1992). The herb does not appear at all in Herba Plantes by Sanitatis (1491), but by the next Century can be found listed either as “hempe” or “cannabis” or “cannabina herba” in herbals by Dodonaeus (1578) and Gerarde (1597, 1633). Neither of these authors makes any mention of the narcotic properties of the herb, but list similar uses to Ortus Sanitatis as well as the intriguing use of the herb to increase egg laying in hens! It is thought (Kalant, 1968) that it was only in the 19th Century that the euphoriant properties of cannabis were learnt of by the British in India, and the French in North Africa. The infamous “Club des Hachischins” founded in Paris in 1844 gained a small European following who experimented with the narcotic effects of the herb (Anon., 1972; Bergel and Davis, 1970) but the widespread use of cannabis for hedonistic purposes in Western Europe is believed to be more recent (Anon., 1972), following the popularisation of American practices of the early twentieth Century. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 39 
It is believed that cannabis (origin unknown) was already being used as a narcotic in Central and South America in the 16th Century (Anon., 1972), when it was introduced for hemp production by the Spanish. Knowledge of its narcotic properties in Brazil however, was said to have spread only following the arrival of slaves from Africa who were already familiar with its use (Anon., 1972). The Mexicans are credited with the dissemination of this knowledge to English-speaking North America between 1920 and 1930 (Kalant, 1968). The hedonistic use of the herb spread so rapidly in North America, both in the criminal underworld and in fashionable circles, that even by the mid-1930s there was considerable official concern both about the dangers to the user and its connection with criminality (Bergel and Davis, 1970). At present, in the majority of countries of the world, cannabis cultivation and use for narcotic purposes is a criminal offence. Nevertheless there is widespread illicit cultivation of the plant and an international trade in narcotic preparations derived from it. 
The history of the medicinal use of cannabis mirrors its narcotic use, although the herb possesses numerous other pharmacological properties. Cannabis appears in ancient Chinese and Indian works on medicine and features in the 15th and 16th century Western herbals. In Medieval Europe, preparations made from the root or seed of hemp cannabis were used for gout, cystitis, gynaecological problems and various other conditions, some of which have been listed above (Le Strange, 1977). However, the superior medicinal properties of the Indian variety of cannabis were recognised by W.B.O’Shaughnessy, a British physician working in Calcutta, who is believed to have introduced the herb to Western medicine. His report in 1842 on the analgesic, anticonvulsant and muscle relaxant properties of the drug generated much interest and led to its widespread use in the 19th Century. It became a recognised official drug, featuring in a number of Pharmacopoeias. Despite extensive cultivation of cannabis in Europe and America, the principal variety used in official medicines came from India (Le Strange, 1977). However, from the beginning of the 20th Century, the popularity of cannabis preparations declined due not only to the variable properties and erratic availability of the plant, but also as a consequence of the emergence of more reliable synthetic medicaments without narcotic effects. Cannabis was removed from the British Pharmacopoeia in 1932, The United States Pharmacopoeia in 1942 and the Indian Pharmacopoeia in 1966. 
Although medicinal use of cannabis has declined, its popularity as an euphoric narcotic has continued to increase to the present day, especially among the younger generation. In recent years, there has been much social debate about the legal position of cannabis use, with many calling for its decriminalisation on the grounds of its low addictive potential and its non-narcotic pharmacological properties which could still make a valuable contribution to modern medicine (Gray, 1995). 
Present Day Cultivation of Cannabis 
Cannabis is now widely distributed throughout the world, both in cultivated forms and as wild plants escaped over the years from cultivation sites. Large scale commercial production takes place in relatively few areas and a distinction can be drawn between its legitimate cultivation as a source of hemp fibre and seeds and the usually illicit 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
40 AMALA RAMAN 
cultivation of cannabis as a source of narcotic materials. Whether a cannabis plant predominantly produces fibre (hemp) or narcotic resin is governed by both genetic and climatic factors (see Chapter 3). However, in general terms it can be said that the two properties seem inversely related and individual varieties can be classified as 
either drug type or fibre type (Bruneton, 1995) depending on the concentrations of the psychoactive compound THC and the non-narcotic cannabinoid, cannabidiol (CBD). The “drug” or “resin” type has a high THC concentration (>1%) and virtually no CBD. This property is observed amongst plants growing in warm climates and producing abundant narcotic resin. The “fibre” or “hemp” type, grown in northern temperate zones has very low THC levels (<0.3%, or even<0.03% for most cannabis varieties cultivated for fibre) and high CBD concentrations. However “intermediate” varieties are also found, with high levels of both THC and CBD. The general growth cycle of plants from the different varieties is similar, except for variations in maturation period (Clarke, 1981: p. 124) although the forms selected, harvesting methods and further processing depend on the purpose for which the plant is cultivated. The breeding and cultivation of cannabis plants with different characterisitics have been described in detail by Clarke (1981). 
Cultivation of Cannabis for Hemp Fibre or Cannabis Seed 
Despite its widespread cultivation in Europe and North America in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the large scale production of hemp for fibre or seed is now restricted to a few areas of Eastern Europe (Hungary, Romania, Ukraine, Russia, former Czechoslovakia, Serbia, Croatia) and China (De Meijer, 1995). This is partly due to a great reduction in the demand for hemp fibre following the advent of more attractive alternatives (synthetic or natural), and secondly due to concerns and restrictions throughout the world on the cultivation of cannabis for narcotic purposes. Since 1961, the cultivation, trade and consumption of cannabis have been placed under restrictions worldwide following the United Nations Organisation’s “Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs” (Brenneisen, 1983). 
Whilst cultivation of drug type cannabis is universally prohibited or legally regulated, rules concerning cultivation of fibre (hemp) forms vary. In Canada, for example, the cultivation of any cannabis without special authorization has been prohibited since 1938, and all hemp fibre used in the country has to be imported (Anon., 1972). De Meijer (1995) has reviewed the availability and registration status of hemp cultivars in Europe. A number have been registered by the European Union (EU), which implies that their cultivation should be permitted by any member state. In practice, individual states may obstruct seed distribution and cultivation on a number of grounds including national drug legislation. In Italy, for instance, hemp cultivation is prohibited as long as a cultivar cannot be identified with a morphological marker linked to low THC-content (De Meijer, 1995). However, in France, a 1990 statute specifies 12 fibre varieties with not more than 0.3% THC which may be cultivated for the manufacture of speciality papers, non-woven products, furniture particle board, animal litter and so on. The producers must hold a contract specifying a buyer and use certified seeds from the authorised varieties (Bruneton, 1995). Cannabis is also legally cultivated for fibre and seed in Switzerland (Brenneisen, 1983). 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 41 
There has been considerable recent interest in the development of hemp as an industrial crop in the Netherlands (De Meijer and Van Soest, 1992). Under the National Hemp Programme, the Centre for Plant Breeding and Reproduction Research (CPRO) have carried out a number of studies surveying variations in cannabis cultivars in terms of stem yield and quality, psychoactive potency, resistance to root-knot nematodes and plant morphology (De Meijer and Keizer, 1996), principally to evaluate their suitability as an arable source of paper pulp. A germplasm collection has been established at CPRO (De Meijer and Van Soest, 1992). 
Fibre type cannabis is best grown in cold or temperate regions where the subsoil is moist and rain is abundant, since fibres produced in hot, dry climates are too brittle to be of commercial value (Bloomquist, 1971). The use of well-manured soil is recommended since this improves the quality of the fibres (Schultes, 1970). Commercially produced, high fibre varieties of even maturation time are selected to facilitate efficient harvesting. These are often monoecious strains which tend to mature more evenly than dioecious ones (Clarke, 1981: p. 15). Hemp bast fibre is produced in the phloem tissue of the stem. Consequently, the plants are grown close to each other so that branching is limited and long slender stems are produced (Fairbairn, 1976). The properties of hemp fibre, its harvesting and processing have been described by Judt (1995) and Clarke (1981: p. 150). Two types of fibres are present in cannabis stems—bark or bast fibres (23–28% by weight) and core fibres (75–70%). The two vary in their physical characteristics and chemical composition (Judt, 1995). Bark fibres are 20–22mm long and contain nearly 70% cellulose and small amounts of hemicellulose (10%) and lignin (5%). Compared to these, core fibres are considerably smaller in length (0.55mm) and have a lower proportion of cellulose (35%) and greater amounts of hemicellulose and lignin (20% of each). 
Cannabis stalks are harvested at a point in the plant’s growth (usually a prefloral stage) most appropriate to the best yield of fibre, before extensive lignification sets in (Clarke, 1981: p. 150). This is often a critical matter of a few days (Judt, 1995). A portion of the crop may be left to develop mature seed which can be used the following year. The harvested stalks are stripped of leaves, dried and stored in bales before further processing. Whole stalks may be pulped by chemical or mechanical means to obtain a heterogenous mix of fibres, whilst bast fibres may be separated by a process known as retting—partial rotting of the stems in water to destroy the other parts of the plant (Clarke, 1981: p. 150). Natural retting takes from a week to a month. The fibres are then dried, wrapped in bundles and stored in a cool, dry area. 
Hemp fibre is relatively expensive to produce; in a study carried out in 1994 (Judt, 1995) to determine the viability of using hemp in the paper industry, the suggested prices of whole hemp stalks and the more valuable bast fibre were US $200 and US $630 respectively per air-dry ton as compared with US $78–199 for hard-wood pulp. 
When the seeds are required as the commercial product, plants are cut only after seed maturation. Seeds fall easily from the floral clusters when mature and may be collected by hand or machine. The remainder of the plant may be used as pulp material (Clarke, 1981: p. 150). 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
42 AMALA RAMAN 
Cultivation of Cannabis for Narcotic Use in India and Surrounding Areas 
In Asia, cannabis grows wild throughout the Himalayas from Kashmir to Eastern Assam, up to altitudes of 10,000ft (Chopra et al., 1958). It extends down into parts of Pakistan, Bangladesh and India (Punjab, Bengal, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar) but in many of these areas, it is possible that wild growth of cannabis is supplemented by human factors arising from local use of the herb (Chopra et al., 1958; Evans, 1989). There are a few licensed growers of cannabis in Madhya Pradesh and Orissa (Anon., 1992), but illicit cultivation of cannabis is widespread not just in India, but throughout the tropical and sub-tropical areas of the world. 
Due to its long historical association with the medicinal and narcotic use of cannabis, cultivation and harvesting practice in India is well documented (Chopra et al., 1958; Anon. 1992). Seed is sown in rows about 1.3m apart in rich, well-manured, weed-free soils; light or loamy soils are preferred (Evans, 1989; Chopra et al., 1958). Sowing takes place in June or July and harvesting in December or January. When the plants reach a height of about 20cm, they are thinned out and the lower branches removed to stimulate growth of the flowering branches. The narcotic components of cannabis (mainly THC) are found in a resin secreted by glandular trichomes on the leaves and flower bracts, particularly on pistillate flowers (Clarke, 1981). 
In some areas, the tradition is that, as soon as flowering begins, the male plants are identified and systematically removed by the roots (Bloomquist, 1971). A common belief that the male plants are pharmacologically inactive is not true since similar amounts of cannabinoids may be produced in plants of either sex (Chiesa et al., 1973; Valle et al., 1968). However, male plants often yield less plant material, and the staminate bracts have fewer glandular trichomes than the pistillate ones (Clarke, 1981). It has further been shown that buds from unfertilized flowering tops of female plants are more potent (i.e. contain higher THC levels) than fertilised buds, and may even exceed some resin samples in cannabinoid content (El Sohly et al., 1984). When unpollinated, the pistillate plants start to produce more capitate glandular (resin producing) trichomes probably as a protection for the unfertilised ovule (Clarke, 1981). The product consisting of unfertilised flowering tops is referred to as “sinsemilla”, derived from the Spanish words “sin” (without) and “semilla” (seed) (Rosenthal, 1984). It is highly valued not only for its greater potency, but also for its more intense aroma and enhanced appearance (Rosenthal, 1984). 
To obtain sinsemilla, it is imperative that the male plants are removed meticulously before any large flower clusters appear, since even a single male flower is capable of yielding sufficient pollen to fertilise a large number of females. Male flowers growing in plant internodes can be used to to distinguish them from females at an early stage of their development (Rosenthal, 1984; Clarke, 1981). However, this practice requires much care and attention and the removal of male plants to produce sinsemilla buds is generally carried out only in small cultivation sites (El Sohly et al., 1984). Consequently seeds are commonly encountered in many of the commercial cannabis products (Baker et al., 1980b). 
When grown for narcotic or medicinal use in India, the main parts of the cannabis plant harvested are the leaves, female flowering tops or the resin itself. Different harvesting and processing methods are used depending on the final product required 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 43 
(Chopra et al., 1958; Anon., 1992). Bhang consists of larger leaves and twigs of the plant and is prepared by simply cutting the plants (wild or cultivated), drying them and beating them against a hard surface to separate the leaves. Both male and female plants may be used (Evans, 1989) and flowering parts are frequently present. Ganja or gunja consists of the dried flowering and fruiting tops of the female plant from which the resin has not been removed. Harvesting for ganja begins when the lower leaves begin to turn yellow. Spikes bearing the inflorescences are cut off and taken to the manufacturer’s yard. For Bombay ganja, the plant material is piled into ridges and furrows and the material subjected to repeated treading by foot, turning over, drying and retreading. This results in the formation of compact sheaves which are made into piles and kept under pressure for a few days. The heaps are turned over, spread again and the treading repeated. The material is sifted to separate out dust, stones, seeds and leaves and then packed into a flat cake. For Bengal ganja, the withered flowering tops are not trampled on, but rolled by hand or foot to form rounded or sausage shaped masses. 
According to Clarke (1981: p. 152), flowering tops or floral clusters are best dried by hanging the plants or clusters upside down, a method practised by some growers. This has the effect of allowing the leaves to hang next to the clusters and protect them from mechanical damage which may cause loss of the resin. The method also 
serves to enhance the appearance of the clusters when dry, since they appear larger than if they are compressed by laying flat to dry. During the drying process, the characteristics of the leaves and flowers change in that the unpleasant “green” taste of the cannabis is gradually lost in a process known as “curing”. This does not happen if drying occurs too rapidly. However, too slow or incomplete drying may lead to deterioration of the plant material by the agency of micro-organisms (Clarke, 1981: p. 153). Removal of the outer leaves from the dried floral clusters known as “manicuring”. Manicuring before drying may result in loss of resin potency due to greater breakdown of THC (Clarke, 1981: p. 153). 
Another Indian product charas (or churrus) is the actual resin, in crude form, from the leaves and flowering tops. Men dressed in leather suits, jackets or aprons walk through the fields rubbing and crushing against the plants in the morning shortly after sunrise. The resin exuding from the leaf and flower trichomes sticks to the leather and can be scraped off (Samuelsson, 1992). Other methods include rubbing the flowering tops with the hands, from which resin is later scraped off, beating the flowering tops over a piece of cloth on which the resin collects as a greyish powder, or thrashing the tops against smooth concrete walls and collecting the powder and resin that stick to the wall (Samuelsson, 1992; Chopra et al., 1958). 
Bhang, ganja and charas have been in use for many centuries in India. The dried and crushed flower heads and small leaves (ganja) from any geographical source, are commonly referred to as marijuana and the resin (charas) is referred to as hashish. Other names encountered for the different types of cannabis products described above 
are discussed further on in this chapter. Relatively recently, a further product of cannabis has entered the illicit market and is a concentrated liquid extract or oil produced by hot-solvent extraction or distillation of the resin (Brenneisen, 1983), or occasionally similar treatment of the herb or flowering tops (Baker et al., 1980b). 
Three to six kilograms of resin are needed to produce one kilogram of oil (Stamler et al., 1985), which may subsequently be dissolved in a vegetable oil (Anon., 1992). 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
44 AMALA RAMAN 
The product contains high levels of THC and is commonly referred to as hash oil. This is not to be confused with cannabis seed oil which is a fixed oil devoid of narcotic properties. 
Worldwide Cultivation Sites of Narcotic Cannabis 
The international trafficking of cannabis products is mainly supplied from a few major source countries in tropical or sub-tropical areas of the world. Products originating in India or Pakistan are often seized by Customs officials, but other equally important producers are Colombia, Mexico, Jamaica, Morocco, Lebanon and Thailand (Bruneton, 1995; Stamler et al., 1985; Brenneisen and El Sohly, 1988). 
However, since this illicit trade is a lucrative one, smaller seizures of cannabis products originating from diverse parts of the world are encountered. These include other South American and Caribbean countries, Southern parts of North America, Egypt, Turkey and Nepal as well as various non-Mediterranean African countries viz. Ghana, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Kenya, Zaire, Malawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe and South Africa (Baker et al., 1980a, b; 1982). Different strains of cannabis are grown in these locations, and consequently, the gross phenotype of the cannabis plants can vary from the short, broad strains of the Hindu Kush to tall meandering varieties found in Thailand (Clarke, 1981; pp. 102–118). Chemical characteristics of plants from different geographical origins are also known to vary (see Chapter 3). 
Indoor Cultivation of Cannabis 
As well as large scale cultivation in the aforementioned tropical or sub-tropical regions, a proportion of the cannabis used for hedonistic purposes is cultivated by individuals in temperate end-user countries either for personal use or supply. Indoor or greenhouse cultivation, which has been described extensively by Rosenthal (1984), reduces the problem of poor resin potency due to low outdoor temperatures and minimises the risk of detection by law-enforcement agencies (Stamler et al., 1985). Photoperiod can be controlled with the use of, for example, blackout screens in order to force flowering (Clarke, 1981, p. 148). Growth from seed can be successful, but in many of these illicit operations, vegetative propagation is carried out from stem cuttings of female plants, firstly in order to speed up propagation and secondly to ensure the sex of the plant. The cuttings may be grown either in soil or hydroponically, often without roots (Rosenthal, 1984). Hydroponic propagation of stem cuttings has the legal advantage, in the United States of America for instance, that the cutting is not classed as a “plant” if it lacks roots (Taylor et al., 1994). This assumes significance where the severity of sentencing is based on the total count of “plants” in the defendant’s possession. As well as indoor cultivation of cannabis plants, clandestine small scale operations in Canada for producing hash oil have also been reported (Stamler et al., 1985). 
ILLICIT CANNABIS PRODUCTS 
Synonyms for Cannabis Preparations 
The main illicit products of cannabis plants are female flowering tops with or without leaves, the resin from the flowering tops and an oil extracted or distilled from the 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 45 
resin, or more rarely, directly from the leaves and flowering tops. Many names are in use for these products in different parts of the world. 
Preparation of the leaves and flowering tops are generally referred to in English speaking countries as cannabis, Indian hemp or very often marijuana (sometimes rendered marihuana). Various etymological sources suggested for the latter name include the Mexican-Spanish mariguana or Portuguese mariguango meaning “intoxicant”, the Mexican-Spanish slang Marijuana (Mary-Jane) or Maria y Juana (Mary and Jane), or an earlier Aztec word milan-a-huan (Bloomquist, 1971). Names in other parts of the world include bhang (India, leaves) ganja or gunja (India, Jamaica, flowering tops), kif or kief (Morocco), dagga (Southern Africa), maconha (Brazil), kabak (Turkey), and rarely hashish (Egypt) although this latter name usually refers to the resin. Common slang names in the West include grass, pot, dope, weed, Mary Jane, hash and less often, shit, bush, tea, Texas tea, locoweed, griefo, hay, hemp, jive, mor-a-griefa, rope, boo, wacky backy, or black (Bloomquist, 1971; Anon., 1972; Bergel and Davies, 1970; Gosden, 1987). 
Cannabis resin, known as charras or churrus in India is almost universally referred to as hashish. The word has in many texts been linked to the terms “ashashin” or “hashashi” (hashashan=herb eaters), fanatical religious followers of an 11th Century Persian leader, known to the Crusaders as the Old Man of the Mountains (Bergel and Davis, 1970; Anon., 1972). It is said that their political and military activities led to their name forming the root of the English word “assassin”, whilst their connection with the use of cannabis formed the basis of the derivation of “hashish”. This linguistic derivation is under some dispute, and it has been said that the Arabic word “hashish” which means “dry herb”, “grass” or even “hemp” is a far more likely origin (Anon., 1972). Slang names for the resin include hash, shit and stuff (Brenneisen, 1983). The oil obtained from cannabis resin is known as hashish oil or more commonly hash oil (Gosden, 1987). Slang names include oil, red oil, and Indian oil (Brenneisen, 1983). 
Cigarettes containing marijuana, hashish or hash oil, are known as reefers on joints (Wills, 1993), and plastic bags containing leafy plant material, usually with seeds present are known as a stash (Bloomquist, 1971). 
International Trafficking of Illicit Cannabis Products 
Stamler et al. (1985) have reviewed the local geographical sites of production within the major source countries, as well as local cultivation, storage and trafficking practices. For example, two annual harvests are obtained in Colombia, and there is evidence that crops are staggered in order to ensure a continuous supply. Generally, the crop is cultivated by individual farmers and sold to drug traffickers who may also cultivate the plant. The cut and dried plants are packaged in 20–35kg bundles and transported by mule to clandestine airstrips or more commonly beaches. Maritime rather than airplane transport is common in the illicit supply of Colombian marijuana which is more frequently encountered in North America than in Europe. Sea routes are often used by smugglers operating from Mediterranean sources and Thailand, whereas hashish smuggling from India and Pakistan is usually done on a small scale by couriers travelling on commercial airlines. Small quantities of cannabis products may also be sent between countries via the normal postal service. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
46 AMALA RAMAN 
Drug trafficking patterns are subject to change over time (Stamler et al., 1985), influenced no doubt by political factors in source countries as well as the work of customs and police officials worldwide. There is also evidence that cannabis products from one source country may be shipped to their eventual destination via an intermediate country, itself perhaps involved in cannabis cultivation. For instance, Colombian or Thai cannabis may be transported through Mexico to the United States (Brenneisen and El Sohly, 1988), whilst the geographical location of Jamaica makes it an important storage and forwarding site for the drugs from other sources (Stamler et al., 1985). 
The predominant type of product supplied may differ from country to country. Countries such as Colombia, Mexico, Bolivia, Thailand and the non-Mediterranean African countries generally supply only marijuana, whereas in addition to marijuana, hashish and hash oil are produced in Morocco, the Middle East, India and Pakistan (Brenneisen, 1983), and Jamaica (Stamler et al., 1985). 
Cannabis products from different parts of the world vary in appearance not only due to variations in plant characteristics, but also processing methods and packaging. A range of these products is shown in Figures 3–5. El Sohly et al. (1984), Baker et al. (1980a, b) and Brenneisen (1983) have described some visual characteristics indicative of the geographical origin of cannabis products. Marijuana for instance can sometimes be obtained in the form of loose plant material consisting of various combinations of 
Figure 3 Cannabis products from around the world. Top row, left to right: Indian, Lebanese, Turkish and Pakistani hashish. Bottom row, left to right: Swiss hashish, Zairean marijuana, Swiss marijuana, Morrocan hash oil. Photograph courtesy of Professor R.Brenneisen, University of Bern 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 47 
Figure 4 Thai sticks of cannabis. Photograph courtesy of Professor R.Brenneisen, University of Bern 
Figure 5 Moroccan hashish with characteristic imprint. Photograph courtesy of Professor R.Brenneisen, University of Bern 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
48 AMALA RAMAN 
dried leaves, stems and seeds, with the colour varying from shades of green to brown depending on the source country (Baker et al., 1980b). However, a classical Mexican packaging method is to compress the plant material into a block or kilobrick, whereas marijuana from Thailand is obtained as “Thai sticks” (Figure 4) consisting of leafy material tied around stems (El Sohly et al., 1984). Sinsemilla is obtained as loose flowering tops characterised by the absence of seeds (El Sohly et al., 1984). 
Cannabis resins (hashish) from Mediterranean countries are characteristically powdery and pale green or brown whereas those from India, Nepal and Pakistan are much darker, varying from brown to almost black (Baker et al., 1980a,b). The resin is often moulded into characteristic shapes (Figure 3), indicative of the country of origin (Baker et al., 1980b) such as sticks from India, or rectangular slabs from Morocco with a characteristic imprint (Figure 5). 
Variations in the chemical profiles of cannabis products of different origins have been examined, particularly as a means of identifying the source country of seizures; this is reviewed more fully in Chapter 3. Crosby et al. (1984) have suggested that a study of the insects present in a sample of cannabis can allow an exact indication of its country of origin. 
THC Content and Stability of Cannabis Preparations 
The content of the main psychoactive constituent, THC, in cannabis products varies greatly depending on the type of preparation, geographical source, plant strain, quality and age of the preparation. Estimates vary, but according to Fairbairn (1976) marijuana contains up to 8% THC, hashish up to 14% THC, and hash oil up to 
60% THC. Sinsemilla buds may contain up to 10% THC (Wills, 1993). In a study comparing THC content of a number of cannabis products confiscated over a ten year period in the United States of America (El Sohly et al., 1984), sinsemilla buds were found to be more potent than the average hashish sample. 
The figures given above are approximate upper limits, and values commonly encountered may be considerably lower and occasionally even higher. For example, the average THC content in hash oil samples collected in the American study (El Sohly et al., 1984) was about 18%. A popular cannabis preparation often seized from users is reefers or joints consisting of cigarettes containing marijuana, hashish or hash oil (Wills, 1993). These have been shown to vary greatly (Fairbairn et al., 1974; Humphreys and Joyce, 1982) in the amount of cannabis plant material (11– 1090mg) or cannabis resin (6–838 mg) and consequently in the THC content (0.14– 41 mg) per reefer. 
Baker et al. (1980a) have examined the variation in THC content of Cannabis products illicitly imported into the United Kingdom over the period 1975–1978. Geographical variations in potency were seen but these were found to be changeable. For instance, in the early part of the study, herbal cannabis from South East Asia was found to be of a higher quality (i.e. THC content) than from other parts of the world, but its quality had declined by 1978. Jamaican cannabis, however, improved in quality over the same period. Hash oil from India, Kenya and Pakistan had very similar mean THC contents (33, 34 and 30%) in 1977 whereas the values were very different (40, 16 and 18%) in 1978. However, in both this and a further study (Baker et al., 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 49 
1982) it was noted that there was considerable variation in THC content even within samples from a given country of origin, and so a single sample could not be considered indicative of the quality of all similar products from that source. 
In both the above studies, THC was estimated as the total of THC and delta-9- tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA) since the latter is converted to THC both during the analytical process and during the smoking of cannabis preparations. In a different study however (Baker et al., 1981), the two compounds were estimated individually in a range of marijuana and hashish samples. THC values ranged from 1–10.6% in cannabis herb and 6.0–12.5% in the resin. The THCA: THC ratios in the resins also varied from 0.5:1 to 6.1:1. Higher ratios were encountered in resins from the Mediterranean area, whereas the lower ones were measured in samples from the Indian sub-continent. Thus despite some general trends, there appears to be considerable variation in the THC content of products derived from a single source country both at any given time, and over longer time scales. 
The age and storage conditions of cannabis products can affect their potency due to changes in THC content. A 1931 herbal (Grieve, 1974) indicates that two-year old ganja is almost inert. However, according to Fairbairn et al. (1976) the stability of a cannabis preparation depends on its preparation and storage. In one experiment, about 90% of the THC content of marijuana herb was still present after storage for a year at room temperature in the dark (Fairbairn, 1976). Exposure to air and daylight but not air alone had a deleterious effect, particularly on solutions of cannabinoids (Fairbairn et al., 1976). Temperatures of up to 20°C had little effect on stability although higher values caused breakdown of THC. However, another important factor was the integrity of the resin glands (Fairbairn et al., 1976). Damage to these by rubbing or scraping leads to rupture of the glands and exposure of the cannabinoids to oxidation even in the dark. However, the authors concluded that herbal or resin cannabis is reasonably stable for one to two years if stored in the dark at room temperature. 
Light alone produces polymerisation of THC whereas oxidation converts THC mainly to CBN, the non-narcotic compound cannabinol (Fairbairn, 1976). Turner et al. (1973) had shown in an earlier study that hexahydrocannabinol and other minor products were produced in addition to CBN. A decomposition pathway of THC to 
CBN involving a number of hydroxylated intermediates has been suggested by Turner and El Sohly (1979). Harvey et al. (1985) found that in a 140 year old ethanolic cannabis extract, most of the THC had decomposed to CBN and that the intermediates postulated by Turner and El Sohly (1979) could be detected. However, these intermediates were not detected in samples of dried material containing high levels of CBN and dating back to the beginning of this century (Harvey, 1990). This result suggests that possible alternative or additional mechanisms of breakdown may occur in the dried material. It was also observed that although CBN was the main cannabinoid found in the samples, significant amounts of THC had survived, indicating that breakdown was not as rapid as would have been predicted from the work of previous authors. The acid analogues of THC, CBN and other cannabinoids were also present, indicating their relative stability under the storage conditions (dry material at room temperature with possible exposure to light). 
In a separate study in which hashish resin samples were exposed to temperatures of 80°C in the dark, the acid forms CBNA, THCA and CBDA (cannabidiolic acid) 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
50 AMALA RAMAN 
underwent decarboxylation to CBN, THC and CBD respectively. However the total amounts of acid and decarboxylated forms decreased with time indicating that other reactions such as polymerisation and disproportionation were also occuring under these conditions (Kovar and Linder, 1991). Thus light, air and heat may all contribute to the breakdown of THC in cannabis products. 
It has been found (Smith and Vaughan, 1977) that there are considerable differences in the relative amounts of different cannabinoids in the inner and outer layers of resin samples, although the pattern is somewhat erratic. THCA concentrations are higher in inner layers, indicating that exposed areas are prone to decarboxylation. 
Although the narcotic properties of cannabis have generally been ascribed to THC, Cannabis sativa in fact contains a very large number of phytochemicals, whose pharmacological activities have not been fully investigated. It is more than likely that the overall pharmacological profile of cannabis preparations is due to a number of substances present. The phytochemical characteristics of Cannabis sativa are described in the next Chapter. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The services of the Herbarium Library at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, the libraries at the Chelsea Physic Garden and the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain and the Cannabis Bibliographic Library at the University of Mississippi are gratefully acknowledged. 
REFERENCES 
Anonymous (1972) A. report of the commision of inquiry into the non-medical use of drugs, Ministry of National Health and Welfare, Information Canada, Ottawa. 
Anonymous (1992). The wealth of India; a dictionary of Indian raw materials and industrial products. Raw materials volume 3: Ca-Ci, Publications and Information Directorate, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, India, pp. 195–205. 
Baker, P.B., Bagon, K.R. and Gough, T.A. (1980a) Variation in the THC content in illicitly imported Cannabis products . Bull. Narc., 32(4), 47–54. 
Baker, P.B, Gough, T.A, Johncock, S.I.M, Taylor, B.J. and Wyles, L.T. (1982) Variation in THC content in illicitly imported Cannabis products—Part II. Bull. Narc., 34(3–4), 101–108. 
Baker, P.B., Gough, T.A. and Taylor, B.J. (1980b) Illicitly imported Cannabis products: some physical and chemical features indicative of their origin. Bull. Narc., 32(2), 31–40. Baker, P.B., Taylor, B.J. and Gough, T.A. (1981) The tetrahydrocannabinol and tetrahydrocannabinolic acid content of cannabis products. J. Pharm. Pharmacol., 33, 369–372. 
Bergel, F. and Davies, D.R.A. (1970) All about drugs, Thomas Nelson and Sons Ltd, London, pp. 42–47. 
Bloomquist, E.R. (1971). Marijuana the second trip (Revised Edn), Glencoe Press, Collier Macmillan Canada Ltd, pp. 1–11. 
Bradshaw, R.H.W., Coxon, P., Greig, J.R.A. and Hall, A.R. (1981) New fossil evidence for the 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 51 
past cultivation and processing of hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) in Eastern England. New Phytol., 89(3), 503–510. 
Brenneisen, R. (1983) Psychotrope Drogen. I. Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabinaceae). Pharm. Acta Helv., 58(11), 314–320. 
Brenneisen, R. and Kessler, T. (1987) Psychotrope Drogen 1. Pharm. Acta Helv., 62(5–6), 134–139. 
Brenneisen, R. and El Sohly, M.A. (1988) Chromatographic and spectroscopic profiles of cannabis of different origins: Part I. J. Forensic Sci.,33(6), 1385–1404. 
Bruneton, J. (1995) Orcinols and Phloroglucinols. In Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants. Intercept Ltd, Hampshire, UK, pp. 371–379. 
Chiesa, E.P., Rondina, R.V.D. and Coussio, J.D. (1973) Chemical composition and potential activity of Argentine marihuana. J. Pharm. Pharmacol.,25, 953–956. 
Chopra, R.N., Chopra, I.C., Handa, K.L. and Kapoor, L.D. (1958) In Chopra’s Indigenous Drugs of India , U.N. Dhur and Sons Pvte Ltd, Calcutta, India, pp. 84–92. Clarke, R.C. (1981) Marijuana botany. An advanced study: the propagation and breeding of distinctive cannabis, And/Or Press, Berkeley, California, USA. 
Corrigan, D. and Lynch, J.J. (1980) An investigation of potential staining reagents for the glandular trichomes of Cannabis sativa. Planta Med., Suppl., 163–169. Crosby, T.K., Watt, J.C., Kistemaker, A.C. and Nelson, P.E. (1984) Entomological identification of the origin of imported cannabis plants. J. Forens. Sci. Soc.,24(4), 290. De Meijer, E. (1995) Fibre hemp cultivars: A survey of origin, ancestry, availability and brief agronomic characteristics. J. Int. Hemp Assoc.,2(2), 66–73. 
De Meijer, E.P.M. and Keizer, L.C.P. (1996) Patterns of diversity in Cannabis. Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution, 43, 41–52. 
De Meijer, E.P.M. and Van Soest, L.J.M. (1992) The CPRO Cannabis germplasm collection. Euphytica, 62, 201–211. 
Dodonaeus seu Dodoens, R. (1578). Niewe Herball or Historie of Plantes. Translated out of French by Henry Lyte, p. 71. 
El Sohly, M.A., Holley, J.H., Lewis, G.S., Russel, M.H. and Turner, C.E. (1984) Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. XXIV: The potency of confiscated marijuana, hashish and hash oil over a ten-year period. J. Forensic Sci.,29(2), 500–514. 
Emboden, W. (1972) Narcotic plants, Studio Vista, London, UK, pp. 14–16. Evans, W.C. (1989) Hallucinogenic, allergenic, teratogenic and other toxic plants. In W.C. Evans, (ed.), Trease and Evans Pharmacognosy 13th Edn, Ballière Tindall, London, UK, pp. 743–748. 
Fairbairn, J. (1976) The Pharmacognosy of Cannabis. In J.D.P. Graham (ed.), Cannabis and Health. Academic Press Inc., London, UK, pp. 3–19. 
Fairbairn, J. (1972) The trichomes and glands of Cannabis sativa L. Bull. Narc., 24(4), 29–33. Fairbairn, J.W., Hindmarch, I., Simic, S. and Tylden, E. (1974) Cannabinoid content of some English reefers. Nature, 249, 276–278. 
Fairbairn, J.W., Liebman, J.A. and Rowan, M.G. (1976) The stability of cannabis and its preparations on storage. J. Pharm. Pharmacol.,28, 1–7. 
French, C.N. and Moore, P.D. (1986) Deforestation, Cannabis cultivation and schwingmoor formation at Cors Llyn (Llyn mire) Central Wales. New Phytol., 102, 469–482. Gerarde, J. (1597) Herball: or Generall Historie of Plantes, London, p. 572. Gerarde, J. (1633) The Herball or Generall Historie of Plantes. Enlarged and amended by Thomas Johnson, London, p. 708. 
Godwin, H. (1967) Pollen analytical evidence for the cultivation of Cannabis in England. Rev. Palaeobot. Palynol.,4, 71–80. 
Gosden, T.B. (1987) Drug abuse: the facts about today’s drug scene—(Take control), David and Charles Publishers plc, Devon, UK, pp. 116–118. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
52 AMALA RAMAN 
Gray, C. (1995) Cannabis—the therapeutic potential. Pharm. J.,254, 771–773. Grieve, M. (1974) A modern herbal, Jonathan Cape Ltd, London, UK. First published 1931, reprinted 1974. C.F.Leyel (ed.), p. 396. 
Hammond, C. and Mahlberg, P. (1977) Morphogenesis of capitate glandular hairs of Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae). Am. J. Bot, 65, 1023–1031. 
Haney, A. and Bazzaz, F.A. (1970) Some ecological implications of the distribution of hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) in the United States of America. In C.R.B.Joyce and S.H.Curry (eds.), The Botany and Chemistry of Cannabis, Churchill, London, UK, pp. 39–48. 
Harvey, D.J. (1985) Examination of a 140 year old ethanolic extract of Cannabis: identification of new cannabitriol homologues and the ethyl homologue of cannabinol. In D.J.Harvey (ed.), Marihuana ‘84: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Cannabis, IRL Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 23–30. 
Harvey, D.J. (1990) Stability of cannabinoids in dried samples of cannabis dating from around 1896–1905. J. Ethnopharmacol., 28, 117–128. 
Heslop-Harrison, J. (1957) The experimental modification of sex expression in flowering plants. Biol. Rev., 32, 1–51. 
Humphreys, I.J. and Joyce, J.R. (1982) A survey of the cannabis content of unsmoked reefer cigarettes. J. Forens. Sd Sou.,22, 291–292. 
Index Kewensis—an Enumeration of the Genera and Species of Flowering plants. (1893 and supplements to 1990), Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK. 
Janischevsky, D.E. (1924) Forma konopli na sornykh mestack v Yugovostochnoi Rossii. Ucen. Zap. Saratovsk. gosud. Cernysevskogo Univ. 2(2), 3–17. 
Judt, M. (1995) Hemp (Cannabis sativa L.)—salvation for the earth and for the papermakers. Agro Food lnd. Hi-tech., 6(4), 35–37. 
Kalant, O.J. (1968) An interim guide to the cannabis (marihuana) literature. Addiction Research Foundation, Bibliographic series 2, p. 1. 
Kovacs, I., Rab, A., Rusznak, I. and Annus, S. (1992) Hemp (Cannabis sativa) as a possible raw material for the paper industry. Cellulose Chem. Tech.,26(5), 627–635. Kovar, K.A. and Linder, H. (1991) Investigation of Hashish: Content uniformity of different samples by coupled HPLC/PC-analysis . Arch. Pharm. (Weinheim), 324, 329–333. Lamark, J.B. de (1785). Encyclopédique de Botanique I (part 2), 694–695. Lanyon, V.S., Turner, J.C. and Mahlberg, P.G. (1981) Quantitative analysis of cannabinoids in the secretory product from capitate-stalked glands of Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae). Bot. Gazette, 142(3), 316–319. 
Lawi-Berger, C. and Kapetanidis, I. (1983) Contribution à l’étude chimiotaxonomique due genre Cannabis (Cannabaceae). 2e partie: Analyse quantitative des acides gras dans les akènes de Cannabis sativa L. Pharm. Acta Helv., 58(3), 79–81. 
Lawi-Berger, C., Miège, J. and Miège, M.N. (1983a) Contribution à l’étude chimiotaxonomique due genre Cannabis (Cannabaceae). 3e partie: Analyse des protèines et des enzymes contenus dans les akènes. Pharm. Acta Helv., 58(5–6), 165–171. 
Lawi-Berger, C., Stephanou, E., Buchs, A. and Kapetanidis, I. (1983b) Contribution à l’étude chimiotaxonomique due genre Cannabis (Cannabaceae). 1re partie: Analyse qualitative des acides gras dans les akènes de Cannabis sativa L. Pharm. Acta Helv., 58(2), 48–51. 
Le Strange, R. (1977) A history of herbal plants, Arco Publishing House Inc., New York, USA, pp. 64–65. 
Malingré, T., Hendricks, H., Batterman, S., Bos, R. and Visser, J. (1975) The essential oil of Cannabis sativa. Planta Med.,28, 56–61. 
Nigam, R.K., Varkey, M. and Reuben, D.E. (1981a) Irradiation induced changes in flower formation in Cannabis sativa L. Biologica plantarum, 23(5), 389–391. 
Nigam, R.K., Varkey, M. and Reuben, D.E. (1981b) Streptovaricin induced sex expression in male and female plants of Cannabis sativa L. Ann. Bot, 47(1), 169–172. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CANNABIS PLANT 53 
Nigg, H.N. and Siegler, D. (1992) Phytochemical Resources for Medicine and Agriculture, Plenum Press, New York, USA, pp. 39–41. 
O’Shaughnessy, W.B. (1842) On the preparation of the Indian hemp, or gunjah (Cannabis indica): the effects of the animal system in health, and their utility in the treatment of tetanus and other convulsive diseases. Trans. Med. Phys. Soc. Bombay, 1842, 8, 421. 
Quimby, M.W. (1974) Botany of Cannabis sativa. Arch. Inv. Med., 5, Suppl. 1, 127. Ram, H.Y.M. and Sett, R. (1982a) Reversal of ethephon-induced feminization in male plants of cannabis by ethylene antagonists. Zeitschrift fur pflanzenphysiologie, 107(1), 85–89. 
Ram, H.Y.M. and Sett, R. (1982b) Induction of fertile male flowers in genetically female Cannabis sativa plants by silver nitrate and silver thiosulphate complex. Theor. Appl. Gen., 62(4), 369–375. 
Rosenthal, E. (1984) Marijuana growers handbook; indoor/greenhouse edition, Quick American publishing company, San Fransisco, California, USA. 
Samuelsson, G. (1992) Drugs of Natural Origin, Swedish Pharmaceutical Press, Stockholm, Sweden, pp. 155–160. 
Sanitatis, O, (1491) Herba plantes. 
Schultes, R.E. (1970) Random thoughts and queries on the botany of cannabis. In C.R.B.Joyce and S.H.Curry (eds.), The Botany and Chemistry of Cannabis, J.A.Churchill, London, UK, pp. 11–38. 
Schultes, R.E. and Hoffman, A. (1980) The botany and chemistry of hallucinogens, Charles C.Thomas, Springfield, Illinois, USA, pp. 82–116. 
Small, E. and Cronquist, A. (1976) A practical and natural taxonomy for Cannabis. Taxon., 25, 405–435. 
Smith, R.N. and Vaughan, C.G. (1977) The decomposition of acidic and neutral cannabinoids in organic solvents. J. Pharm. Pharmacol.,29, 286–290. 
Stamler, R.T., Fahlman, R.C. and Vigeant, H. (1985) Illicit traffic and abuse of cannabis in Canada. Bull. Narc., 37(4), 37–49. 
Stearn, W.T. (1970) The Cannabis Plant: Botanical Characteristics. In C.R.B.Joyce and S.H.Curry (eds.), The Botany and Chemistry of Cannabis, Churchill, London, UK, pp. 1–10. Taylor, R., Lydon, J. and Andersen, J.D. (1994) Anatomy and viability of Cannabis sativa stem cuttings with and without adventitious roots. J. Forensic Sci.,39(3), 769–777. Thornton, J.I. and Nakamura, J. (1972) Identification of marijuana. J. Forens. Sci. Soc.,12, 461–519. 
Turner, C.E. and El Sohly, M.A. (1979) Constituents of Cannabis sativa L., XVI. A possible decomposition pathway of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol to cannabinol. J. Heterocyclic Chem., 16, 1667–1668. 
Turner, C.E., Hadley, K.W., Fetterman, P.S., Doorenbos, N.J., Quimby, M.W. and Waller, C. (1973) Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. IV. Stability of cannabinoids in stored plant material. J. Pharm. Sci.,62(10), 1601–1605. 
Turner, J., Hemphill, J. and Mahlberg, P. (1977) Gland distribution and cannabinoid content in clones of Cannabis sativa L. Am. J. Bot., 64, 687–693. 
Turner, J.C., Hemphill, J.K. and Mahlberg, P.G. (1978) Quantitative determination of cannabinoids in individual glandular trichomes of Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae). Am. J. Bot., 65, 1103–1106. 
Turner, J.C., Hemphill, J.K. and Mahlberg, P.G. (1981a) Interrelationships of glandular trichomes and cannabinoid content. II: Developing vegetative leaves of Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae). Bull. Narc., 33(3), 63–71. 
Turner, J.C., Hemphill, J.K. and Mahlberg, P.G. (1981b) Interrelationships of glandular trichomes and cannabinoid content. I: Developing pistillate bracts of Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae) . Bull Narc., 33(2), 59–69. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
54 AMALA RAMAN 
Valle, J.R., Lapa, A.J. and Barros, G.G. (1968) Pharmacological activity of cannabis according to sex of the plant. J. Pharm. Pharmacol,20, 798–799. 
Vavilov, N.I. and Bukinich, D.D. (1929) Zemledel’cheskii Afghanistan. Trudy Prikl. Bot., Suppl. 33, 380–382. Reissued in 1959 by Izdatel’stuo Akademi Nauk SSSR, Moskva-Leningrad. Wills, S. (1993) Drugs and substance misuse (5). Cannabis and Cocaine. Pharm. J., 251, 483–485. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
3. THE CHEMISTRY OF CANNABIS 
AMALA RAMAN 1 and ALPANA JOSHI 2 
1 Department of Pharmacy, King’s College London, UK 2 National Center for the Development of Natural Products, University of Mississippi, USA 
The phytochemistry of Cannabis sativa has been extensively researched and more than four hundred compounds belonging to a variety of phytochemical groups have been reported to occur in the plant. According to one estimate, over 7000 scientific papers had been published on cannabis, its constituents and their pharmacological activities by 1980 (Turner et al., 1980). Many detailed descriptions of the chemistry of cannabis have been published over the years, such as those of Mechoulam (1973), Razdan (1973), Crombie and Crombie (1976), Schultes and Hoffman (1980), Harvey (1984) and a major review article dealing exhaustively with the phytochemistry of cannabis by Turner et al. (1980). In the present text, only the most important features of cannabis phytochemistry will be described; the interested reader is referred to one of the more extensive treatments listed above for greater detail. A further source of information is the annotated bibliography of cannabis covering the literature from 1964 published by Waller et al. in 1976 (Volume I) and 1982 (Volume II), updated with regular supplements from 1980 onwards (Waller et al., 1980–1993/4). 
The psychoactive effects of cannabis and its preparations have been ascribed in the main to the presence of tetrahydrocannabinols (THCs), in particular the compound 9-tetrahydrocannabinol ( 9-THC), which was first isolated and identified in 1964 (Gaoni and Mechoulam, 1964a). 9-THC is one of a group of mostly C21 compounds known as cannabinoids, which appear to be unique to Cannabis sativa. More recent studies have demonstrated that cannabinoids other than 9-THC also exhibit a range of pharmacological activities (Formukong et al., 1989). Cannabis also contains noncannabinoid compounds whose effects have not been so widely investigated. An important point regarding Cannabis sativa is that it shows considerable variation in its chemistry, as described later in this chapter. 
CANNABINOID CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS 
Numbering Systems for Cannabinoids 
Over the years, at least 5 numbering systems have been used for cannabinoids (Eddy, 1965). Only two of these, however, are in widespread use (Figure 1). One is based on the formal chemical rules for numbering dibenzopyran type compounds, and is the system used by Chemical Abstracts. This system will be adopted in the present text. In the second system the cannabinoids are numbered as substituted monoterpenoids (based on p-cymene) due to their biogenetic origin. A reader scanning the literature on cannabis may therefore encounter a number of ways of referring to the same 
55 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
56 AMALA RAMAN AND ALPANA JOSHI 
Figure 1 Two common numbering systems used for cannabinoids (Eddy, 1965) 
compound. The major psychoactive component 9-THC, for instance, may be described as either 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (dibenzopyran system) or 1- tetrahydrocannabinol (mono-terpenoid system). Similarly its minor structural isomer, 
8-tetrahydrocannabinol (dibenzopyran system), may be referred to as 1(6)- tetrahydrocannabinol (monoterpenoid system). 
Structural Groups of Cannabinoids 
The very large number of cannabinoids (over 60) known to occur in cannabis (Turner et al., 1980) can be divided into a few main structural types as illustrated in Figure 2. These are the cannabigerol (CBG), cannabichromene (CBC), cannabidiol (CBD), 9- tetrahydrocannabinol ( 9-THC), 8-tetrahydrocannabinol ( 8-THC), cannabicyclol (CBL), cannabielsoin (CBE), cannabinol (CBN), cannabinodiol (CBND) and cannabitriol (CBO) types. Variations on these basic types are fairly standard: presence or absence of a carboxyl group on the phenolic ring (at R2 or R4), a methyl, propyl or butyl side chain replacing the pentyl one (at R3), or a methoxy group in place of one of the hydroxyl moieties. Some of the known compounds in each group are listed in Table 1 (from Turner et al., 1980). For each type, the neutral compound with the pentyl side chain is normally referred to by the name and abbreviation listed above. In general, acid analogues have the letter A suffixed to the abbreviation, methyl ethers the letter M and methyl, propyl and butyl side chain analogues the suffix-Cn where n equals the number of carbons in the side chain. However, propyl analogues often have an abbreviation incorporating the letter V as their complete name usually includes the term “varin” e.g. cannabivarin, cannabi chromevarin (C3 analogues of cannabinol and cannabichromene respectively). 
Most natural cannabinoids have at least two chiral centres at carbons 10a and 6a (Figure 1). The absolute configuration at these centres was determined by Mechoulam and Gaoni (1967) for THC (10a R, 6a R) and CBD (10a S, 6a R). Further details regarding the isolation and absolute stereochemical configuration of the various cannabinoids in Figure 2 and Table 1 can be found in Turner et al. (1980). 
In addition to the main cannabinoid groups described above, some usually very minor constituents belonging to related structural types have been shown to be present in cannabis. They include dehydrocannabifuran (DCBF), cannabifuran (CBF), 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CHEMISTRY 57 
Figure 2 Main structural types of cannabinoids; see Table 1 for examples of compounds 
cannabicitran (CBT), cannabichromanon (CBCN) and a dimeric cannabinoid formed by esterification of cannabidiolic acid with tetrahydrocannabitriol (Turner et al., 1980). One of the most recent cannabinoids isolated from cannabis is cannabinerolic acid—the trans isomer of CBG (Taura et al., 1995). 
Chemical alteration of cannabinoids may occur during harvesting, storage or processing of cannabis preparations. CBN type compounds isolated from cannabis preparations are degradation products of the corresponding THC derivatives (Garret and Tsau, 1974; Turner and El Sohly, 1979; Harvey, 1985), and are not formed biosynthetically. The acid forms of THC are decarboxylated during storage probably by the agency of heat or light; this reaction occurs during smoking of cannabis preparations and in some analytical processes (Baker et al., 1981). 9-THC may isomerise to 8-THC in the presence of strong acids (Mechoulam, 1973). 
Biogenesis of Cannabinoids 
Despite the interest in this group of compounds, surprisingly few actual experimental investigations have been conducted into the biogenesis of cannabinoids. Existing reports have variously involved either neutral compounds or the carboxylated forms. A general outline of the biogenetic origin of the cannabinoids, based on these studies as well as postulates, is depicted in Figure 3 (adapted from Harvey, 1984; Clarke, 1981; Schultes and Huffman, 1980; Turner and Mahlberg, 1985). Numbers in parentheses in this section refer to structures shown in Figure 3. For simplicity, only the acid forms are shown; the neutral cannabinoids commonly encountered in cannabis 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
Table 1 Examples of cannabinoids belonging to each of the main structural types 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, 
part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, 
part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
60 AMALA RAMAN AND ALPANA JOSHI 
Figure 3 Proposed biogenetic pathway for the main cannabinoids 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CHEMISTRY 61 
products may arise either by decarboxylation of the corresponding acids during harvesting and storage (Shoyama et al., 1975) or by a biosynthetic pathway analogous to that shown, but involving the equivalent neutral precursors (Kajima and Piraux, 1982). In support of an independent pathway for neutral compounds, it has been observed that radiolabelled neutral precursors (olivetol and cannibigerol) are incorporated into THC and other neutral cannabinoids but not into THCA (Kajima and Piraux, 1982). 
Some of the earliest articles on the biosynthesis of cannabinoids were published by Simonsen and Todd (1942), Farmilo et al. (1962) and Ni (1963) who proposed menthatriene, limonene and p-mentha-3, 8-diene-5-one repectively as terpene compounds which condensed with olivetolic acid, the precursor for the aromatic ring of the cannabinoids. However, it was Mechoulam and colleagues (Gaoni and Mechoulam, 1964b; Mechoulam and Gaoni, 1965; Mechoulam, 1970, 1973), who suggested the presently accepted route involving initial condensation of a phenolic compound, either olivetolic acid (2) or its decarboxylated analogue, olivetol with the terpene derivative geranyl pyrophosphate (3). This has since been supported by experimental studies (Shoyama et al., 1975) in which malonate, mevalonate (precursors of olivetolic acid and geranyl pyrophosphate) and also geraniol and nerol were incorporated into THCA. CBC, however, appears to be formed by a different pathway; Turner and Mahlberg (1985) have shown that labelled olivetol administered to cannabis seedlings is incorporated only into CBG and THC, but not into CBC. This, and their finding that the developing plant first produces CBC and only later CBG and THC (Vogelmann et al., 1988), implies the possible existence of two divergent pathways. 
In the first route, CBCA (13) arises from combination of geranyl phosphate with a precursor of olivetolic acid (Turner and Mahlberg, 1985), possibly a C12 polyketide (1) derived from acetate/malonate (Shoyama et al., 1975). However, there is also evidence that CBC can arise from CBG in some variants (Shoyama etal., 1975). CBC and its acid form (13) are believed to be the precursors for CBL and CBLA (14) respectively. 
In the second pathway, geranyl phosphate and olivetolic acid condense to form CBGA (4). Hydroxylation to hydroxycannabigerolic acid (5) is followed by rearrangement to an intermediate (6) which can then cyclise to form CBDA (7). Further cyclisation involving one or other of the phenolic hydroxyl groups leads to the potential (only three have actually been isolated from cannabis) formation of four isomeric THCAs (8–11) which vary in the position of the double bond and carboxylic acid group. However, Kajima and Piraux (1982) showed experimentally that CBD is not necessarily involved in THC biosynthesis. They suggest, in agreement with Turner and Hadley (1973), that a common intermediate (6) may give rise to either CBD or rearrange directly to THC. Variation in the levels of enzymes controlling these pathways may account for the chemical variation seen in different varieties of cannabis. 
It is of interest to note that despite support for its involvement in cannabinoid biosynthesis, olivetol itself has not been reported to occur in cannabis. On the contrary, a prominent phenolic component of the glandular trichomes was found by Hammond and Mahlberg (1994) to be phloroglucinol (1,3,5-trihydroxybenzene), which they suggest may have some significance in cannabinoid biosynthesis. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
62 AMALA RAMAN AND ALPANA JOSHI 
Related components of cannabis, such as CBNA and its neutral analogue CBN, are not thought to be biogenetic products, but artefacts arising from the degradation of THCA and THC respectively (Harvey, 1984; Turner and El Sohly, 1979). Radiotracer studies show that the propyl side chain analogues of the cannabinoids do not arise by degradation of the pentyl side chain of the more common cannabinoids (Kajima and Piraux, 1982) and may involve a parallel biogenetic pathway. 
Chemical Methods for Cannabinoid Synthesis 
Interest in their pharmacological activity, as well as the need for reference materials for analytical purposes, has prompted the development of stereospecific synthetic methods for the production of cannabinoids in high yields. Synthetic processes for cannabinoids generally mirror the proposed biosynthetic sequence, involving the 
condensation of an optically active monoterpene with olivetol (5-pentylresorcinol). The monoterpene, reaction conditions and subsequent treatment of intermediates can be varied to obtain the desired cannabinoid product. Monoterpenes used by different researchers include p-mentha-2, 8-dien-1-ol (Petrzilka et al., 1969), carene oxides (Razdan and Handrick, 1970), chrysanthenol (Razdan et al., 1975), citral (El Sohly et al., 1978) and p-menth-2-ene-1, 8-diol (Handrick et al., 1979). Methods for the synthesis of 9-THC and other cannabinoids have been reviewed in detail by Mechoulam et al. (1976), Crombie and Crombie (1976), and Razdan (1984). 
NON-CANNABINOID CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS 
Non-cannabinoid constituents isolated from various parts of the cannabis plant include a range of nitrogenous compounds (including alkaloids), sugars, sugar polymers, cyclitols, fatty acids, amino acids, proteins, glycoproteins, enzymes, hydrocarbons, 
simple alcohols, acids, aldehydes and ketones, steroids, terpenes, non-cannabinoid phenolic compounds, flavonoid glycosides, vitamins and pigments (Turner et al., 1980). The majority of these compounds are found in many other species and are not unique to cannabis. 
Some of the more unusual constituents of cannabis include an amide formed between p-hydroxy-(trans)-cinnamic acid and 2-(p-hydroxyphenyl)-ethylamine, which was isolated from the roots of Mexican cannabis (Slatkin et al., 1971) and the spermidine alkaloids cannabisativine and anhydrocannabisativine isolated from the roots and aerial parts of various cannabis strains (Turner et al., 1980). Non cannabinoid phenolic compounds found in cannabis include spiro-indans (e.g. cannabispiran, cannabispirenone), dihydrostilbenes or bibenzyl compounds (e.g. canniprene) and cannabidihydrophenanthrene (Turner et al., 1980). Additional non cannabinoids isolated from cannabis since the publication of the review by Turner et al. (1980) include three new dihydrostilbenes (El-Feraly, 1984; El Sohly et al., 1984)) and three new spiro-indans (El-Feraly et al., 1986) either from hashish or leaves of cannabis, four phenyldihydronaphthalene lignanamides from cannabis fruits (Sakakibara et al., 1991, 1992) and phloroglucinol glucoside from shoot latex (Hammond and Mahlberg, 1994). The volatile oil of indoor-grown cannabis has 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CHEMISTRY 63 
been analysed and found to contain 68 components of which 57 were found to be known monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes (Ross and El Sohly, 1996). Tris malonate acetylations and decarboxylations involving p-hydroxycinnamic acid have been reported to be involved in the biosynthesis of the dihydrostilbene (bibenzyl) compounds and flavones found in cannabis (Crombie et al., 1988). The dihydrostilbenes are believed to be natural precursors of the spiro-indan compounds (El Sohly and Turner, 1982). 
CHEMICAL VARIATION IN CANNABIS 
Studies on a large number of cannabis plants originating from different parts of the world have led to the acceptance that a number of chemical races or “chemovars” of Cannabis sativa exist. These vary widely in their 9-THC content and therefore psychoactive potency. The types cultivated for fibre production have very low levels of this compound, but show enhanced levels of its non-narcotic, biosynthetic precursor CBD. It has not been possible to correlate the chemovars directly with the different species or subspecies of Cannabis (e.g. sativa, indica, ruderalis) proposed by various authors (see Chapter 2), as these were primarily distinguished on morphological grounds. It is generally believed that the chemovars do not represent individual species, but owe their existence to centuries of cultivation and breeding for one of the two main products i.e. the intoxicant resin or the stem fibre. 
A number of classification systems have been proposed to distinguish psychoactive and fibre strains of cannabis based on their cannabinoid composition (reviewed by Turner et al., 1980). The first classification system, proposed by Grlic (1968), involved the use of a selection of chemical, spectroscopic, microbiological and pharmacological tests whose results were dependent on the levels of CBDA, CBD, 9-THC and CBN in the sample. These markers were regarded as indicative of successive stages of “ripening” or subsequent decomposition of the resin. The more “ripe” samples (with higher levels of 9-THC) were found to originate in tropical areas, commonly associated with production of intoxicant cannabis. 
A few years later, a method based on quantitative analysis of specific cannabinoids was suggested by Waller and his colleagues (Waller and Scigliano, 1970; Fetterman et al., 1971), in which the ratio of 9-THC and its breakdown product CBN to the non-narcotic CBD was measured: 
Samples with ratios greater than 1 were classified as “drug type” and those with ratios below 1 as “fibre type” cannabis. Based on an examination of a large number of samples, Small and Beckstead (1973) further expanded the classification to four phenotypes: 
Phenotype I: high (>0.3%) THC and low (<0.5%) CBD, 
Phenotype II: at least 0.3% THC and high (>0.5%) CBD, 
Phenotype III: relatively little THC and high (>0.5%) CBD, 
Phenotype IV: plants consistently showing trace amounts of CBGM. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
64 AMALA RAMAN AND ALPANA JOSHI 
Turner et al. (1980) have outlined some of the limitations of the Waller and Small systems, which essentially only require the measurement of 9-THC, CBD and CBN. These include the inadequate separation of CBD from CBC and CBV in the analytical systems employed at the time, the absence of CBD and CBC from cannabis of certain geographical origins, the presence of homologues (C3 variants) in some samples which may contribute to psychoactive properties, and the influence of the age of the plant when analysed on its constituents, and consequently the phenotype to which it is assigned. They proposed that other cannabinoids (including C3 homologues) should also be taken into consideration and derived the formula: 
They suggest that the drug type (ratio > 1) and fibre type (ratio < 1) classification could be applied most reliably if the analyses were performed at regular intervals throughout the growing season of the plant, although this would not apply to confiscated samples. 
Paris and Nahas (1984) have reviewed these classification systems and point out that the term “phenotype” is somewhat misleading as this generally refers to visible characteristics rather than genetic traits. They suggest classification into three chemical types, similar to phenotypes I–III of Small and Beckstead (1973) based on absolute content of THC and CBD rather than ratios: 
(1) Drug type: THC>1 %, CBD=0, 
(2) Intermediate drug type: THC>0.5%, CBD>0.5%, 
(3) Fibre type: THC<0.25%, CBD>0.5%. 
This classification into drug, fibre and intermediate types was first suggested by Turner (1980). In addition to the three main groups described above, Fournier et al. (1987), have reported a new chemotype of cannabis in which CBG (rather than CBD or 9- THC) is the dominant cannabinoid. These chemotypes, however, cannot be considered as unique species or subspecies as it has been found that the variations in CBD and 
9-THC content among the plants is completely continuous, and further that individuals from strains belonging predominantly to one group may show characteristics of another (De Meijer et al., 1992). A germplasm collection in which the predominant chemotype has been assessed has been established at Wageningen, 
the Netherlands (De Meijer and Van Soest, 1992). 
Since the drug type and fibre type of cannabis have historically been associated with tropical and temperate regions of the world respectively, there has been considerable attention focussed on whether genetic or geographical factors govern the chemical nature of individual strains. Much of the work to date favours the primary importance of genetic factors in determining the cannabinoid profile of the plant. Fairbairn (1976), for example, reported that when seeds of specific cannabis strains representing either high 9-THC or high CBD varieties were grown in a range of countries (UK, USA, Norway, Canada, Turkey, Thailand) all the plants from a particular batch showed a consistent CBD/ 9-THC pattern, although absolute content varied. Further evidence for genetic influence is that when high 9-THC: low CBD 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CHEMISTRY 65 
strains are crossed with low 9-THC: high CBD varieties, the offspring show a cannabinoid content intermediate between the two (Clarke, 1981). That the local climate is not the primary influence on psychoactive potency is indicated by the successful outdoor cultivation of plants with relatively high 9-THC content in Italy (Bertol and Mari, 1980; Avico et al., 1985), Switzerland (Brenneisen and Kessler, 1987) and even the Danish island of Bornholm (Felby and Nielsen, 1985) which lies 55$N of the equator. 
It has been suggested that over a number of generations, the chemical characteristics of a plant can alter to match more closely the type common to the area of cultivation. Bouquet (1951) reported that after several generations, plants grown in England and France from Indian seeds were indistinguishable from European (fibre) cultigens, whereas European varieties planted in Egypt as a source of fibre altered to low-fibre psychoactive forms. This may indicate the modifying influence of environmental factors, but the possibility of cross pollination with local strains during open cultivation cannot be ruled out. More recently a group in the United Kingdom has grown cannabis plants from seeds of diverse geographical origin under controlled conditions, and monitored their physical and chemical characteristics over four generations (Baker et al., 1982, 1983; Taylor et al., 1985). Marihuana samples prepared from the plants closely resembled the parent preparation even after four generations, and with a few exceptions within each group, the cannabinoid content was still typical of the profile obtained with the original source sample. A notable change in properties was that the THCA/THC ratios in the offspring were higher than in the source sample. This may be due to environmental factors; according to Mechoulam (1970), neutral cannabinoids are rarely found in cannabis grown in northern countries. However, it may also indicate the occurrence of decarboxylation during the preparation or storage of the original sample. 
Genetic control of cannabinoid chemotypes is likely to be mediated via the synthesis of particular enzymes involved in cannabinoid biogenesis. In the proposed biosynthetic sequence (Figure 3), CBG is converted to an intermediate which can form either CBD or THC, and CBD may itself be converted to THC. Thus genetically controlled 
deficiencies in particular steps of the pathway can lead to CBG, CBD or THC dominant plants. 
It is important to note that even though a plant may have the genetic capacity to express a particular enzyme, the environment could still influence the extent to which this occurs and therefore alter the cannabinoid content. In the study by Fairbairn (1976) described earlier, although the dominant cannabinoid remained unchanged 
in the different growth locations for a particular batch of seeds, variations were noted in the actual cannabinoid levels. In a group of Mexican drug type cannabis plants grown in Mississippi (Turner et al., 1982), the CBC content was found to 
increase over a two year period. It was also noted that high temperatures and rainfall resulted in higher 9-THC levels. Mahlberg and Hemphill (1983) have shown the importance of daylight in controlling 9-THC and CBC levels. They found that red, blue and green filters had differing effects on the two cannabinoids, suggesting that the effect of light was being mediated via enzymes involved in their separate biosynthetic pathways. Pate (1983) has suggested that enhanced production of 9- THC in regions of higher light intensity may indicate a protective role for the compound against the harmful effects of UVB radiation. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
66 AMALA RAMAN AND ALPANA JOSHI 
There is considerable evidence that as well as genetic and environmental factors, there is high inherent interplant variability between members of the same chemotype and even the same strain growing under identical conditions (Cortis et al., 1985; De Meijer et al., 1992). Daily and monthly fluctuations in the content of major cannabinoids have also been reported (Phillips et al., 1970; Turner et al., 1975). 
Assessment of the chemical profile of a cannabis strain has been important for two main purposes—to distinguish drug and fibre chemotypes and to try to identify the geographical source of illicit samples of cannabis or cannabis products. Taking the first aspect, the recognition that fibre type cannabis generally has low levels of 
9-THC has been important in allowing countries to legislate for the cultivation of hemp and against the cultivation of narcotic cannabis. For instance, the maximum permitted 9-THC content in fibre hemp is reported as 0.3% and 0.2% respectively 
for France (Bruneton, 1995) and the former USSR (De Meijer et al., 1992). A review of the analytical methods that can be used to measure cannabinoid content is beyond the scope of this chapter, but a recent paper by Lehmann and Brenneisen (1995) who report comparative profiles of drug, fibre and intermediate types using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled to photodiode array detection may be mentioned here. 
A number of studies have examined the possibility of predicting the intoxicant potential of a particular cannabis plant or seed sample without the necessity of growing it to maturity. Independent studies carried out by Barni-Comparini et al. (1984) and Cortis et al. (1985) show that the cannabinoid profile of vegetative leaves even at an early stage in the plant’s development is a good indication of its ultimate chemical characteristics. An attempt has been made to correlate the chemical characteristics of cannabis populations to some non-chemical traits (De Meijer et al., 1992). Morphological features such as achene characteristics, stem width and internode length showed no correlation, but a weak association was found between psychoactive properties, leaflet width and date of anthesis. In another study, although variations were seen in the electrophoretic patterns of seed proteins from different cultivars, these could not be associated with the cannabinoid profile of the plant (De Meijer and Keizer, 1996). The potential use of random amplification of polymorphic DNA (RAPD) in the profiling of cannabis samples has been reported (Gillan et al., 1995), but as yet no correlations to cannabinoid content have been made. 
Cannabis strains that can be classified as drug type on the basis of their 9-THC content, nevertheless show considerable variability in their overall phytochemical profile. Brenneisen and El Sohly (1988) have used high resolution gas-chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (GC-MS), as well as HPLC, to examine the complex profiles of cannabis samples of various known geographical origins. Compounds 
appearing in the chromatographic profiles included both cannabinoids and non cannabinoids, and samples from a common source showed similar characteristic peak patterns. Many of the diagnostically important peaks were found in the terpene region rather than amongst the cannabinoids. Certain components were only found in samples from particular sources e.g. allo-aromadendrene and tetrahydrocannbiorcol were characteristic of Mexican and Jamaican cannabis, whereas caryophyllene oxide (the terpene supposedly detected by sniffer dogs) was absent only in USA derived samples. However, only a limited number of samples were analysed from each source and further work is required to confirm these findings. Baker et al. (1980) examined 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CHEMISTRY 67 
samples from various countries (between 5 and 150 samples from each source) by TLC and reported that although more than one type of product originated from a particular country, these could usually be visually and chemically distinguished. THV ( 9-THC-C 3) was common in illicit cannabis products from South Africa, Angola, Swaziland and Zimbabwe, sometimes exceeding 9-THC in concentration, whereas samples from Ghana, Jamaica and Nigeria had low THV: 9-THC ratios. CBG and CBC were common in Ghanaian samples. CBD was absent in samples from Kenya, Zambia, South Africa and Thailand (in the latter only THC and THCA were detected), whereas Moroccan, Pakistani and Lebanese hashish had significant levels of CBD. Indian cannabis was found to be highly variable in chemical composition, reflecting either the presence of many chemotypes under cultivation or the large size of the country. However, strict geographical patterns cannot be defined and are unlikely to be consistent over a long period of time due to exchange of seeds between countries, often as part of the illicit products transported. 
REFERENCES 
Avico, U., Pacifici, R. and Zuccaro, P. (1985) Variations of tetrahydrocannibinol content in cannabis plants to distinguish the fibre-type from drug-type plants. Bull. Narc., 37(4), 61–65. 
Baker, P.B., Gough, L.A. and Taylor, B.J. (1980) Illicitly imported Cannabis products: some physical and chemical features indicative of their origin. Bull. Narc., 32(2), 31–40. Baker, P.B., Gough, T.A. and Taylor, B.J. (1982) The physical and chemical features of Cannabis grown in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from seeds of known origin. Bull. Narc. , 34(1), 27–36. 
Baker, P.B., Gough, T.A. and Taylor, B.J. (1983) The physical and chemical features of Cannabis grown in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from seeds of known origin—Part II: second generation studies. Bull. Narc., 35(1), 51–62. 
Baker, P.B., Taylor, B.J. and Gough, T.A. (1981) The tetrahydrocannabinol and tetrahydrocannabinolic acid content of cannabis products. J. Pharm. Pharmacol., 33, 369–372. 
Barni-Comparini, I., Ferri, S. and Centini, F. (1984) Cannabinoid level in the leaves as a tool for the early discrimination of cannabis chemovariants. Forensic Sci. Int.,24, 37–42. Bertol, E. and Mari, F. (1980) Observations on cannabinoid content in Cannabis sativa L. grown in Tuscany, Italy. Bull. Narc., 32(4), 55–60. 
Bouquet, R.J. (1951) Cannabis. Bull. Narc., 3, 14–30. 
Brenneisen, R. and El Sohly, M.A. (1988) Chromatographic and spectroscopic profiles of Cannabis of different origins: Part I. J. Forensic Sci.,33(6), 1385–1404. 
Brenneisen, R. and Kessler, T. (1987). Psychotrope Drogen 1. Pharm. Acta Helv., 62(5–6), 134–139. 
Bruneton, J. (1995). Orcinols and Phloroglucinols. In Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants, Intercept Ltd, Hampshire, pp. 371–379. 
Clarke, R.C.C. (1981) Marijuana Botany, And/or Press, Berkeley, California, p. 93 (cross breeding); pp. 169–171 (cannabinoid biosynthesis). 
Cortis, G., Luchi, P. and Palmas, M. (1985) Experimental cultivation of cannabis plants in the Mediterranean area. Bull. Narc., 37(4), 67–73. 
Crombie, L. and Crombie, W.M.L. (1976) Chemistry of the cannabinoids. In J.D.P.Graham, (ed.), Cannabis and Health, Academic Press, London, pp. 43–76. 
Crombie, L.W., Crombie, M.L. and Firth, D.F. (1988) Synthesis of bibenzyl cannabinoids, 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
68 AMALA RAMAN AND ALPANA JOSHI 
hybrids of two biogenetic series found in Cannabis sativa. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. I,5, 1263–1270. 
De Meijer, E.P.M. and Keizer, L.C.P. (1996) Patterns of diversity in Cannabis. Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution, 43, 41–52. 
De Meijer, E.P.M. and Van Soest L.J.M. (1992) The CPRO Cannabis germplasm collection. Euphytica, 62(3), 201–211. 
De Meijer, E.P.M., Van der Kamp, H.J. and Van Eeuwijk, F.A. (1992) Characterisation of Cannabis accessions with regard to cannabinoid content in relation to other plant characters. Euphytica, 62(3), 187–200. 
Eddy, N.B. (1965) The Question of Cannabis, Bibliography, United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs, E/CN7/49. 
El-Feraly, F.S. (1984) Isolation, characterisation and synthesis of 3, 5, 4’-trihydroxybibenzyl from Cannabis sativa. J. Nat. Prod.,47(1), 89–92. 
El-Feraly, F.S., El-Sherei, M.M. and Al-Muhtadi, F.J. (1986) Spiro-indans from Cannabis sativa. Phytochem.,25(8), 1992–1994. 
El Sohly, H.N. and Turner, C.E. (1982) Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. XXII: isolation of spiro-indan and dihydrostilbene compounds from a Panamanian variant grown in Mississippi, United States of America. Bull. Narc., 34(2), 51–56. 
El Sohly, H.N., Ma, G.E., Turner, C.E. and El Sohly, M.A. (1984). Constituents of Cannabis sativa XXV. Isolation of two new dihydrostilbenes from a Panamanian variant. J. Nat. Prod., 47(3), 445–452. 
El Sohly, M.A., Boeren, E.G. and Turner, C.E. (1978) Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. An improved method for the synthesis of dl-cannabichromene. J. Heterocyclic Chem.,15, 699– 700. 
Fairbairn, J.W. (1976) The Pharmacognosy of Cannabis. In J.D.P.Graham, (ed.), Cannabis and Health, Academic Press, London, NY, San Fransisco, pp. 3–19. 
Farmilo, C.G., Connell-Davis, T.W.M., Vandenheuval, F.A. and Lane, R. (1962) Studies on the chemical analysis of marihuana, biogenesis, paper chromatography, gas chromatography and country of origin . U.N. Secretariat Document, ST/SOA/Ser.s/7. 
Felby, S. and Nielsen, E. (1985) Cannabinoid content of cannabis grown on the Danish island of Bornholm. Bull. Narc., 37(4), 87–94. 
Fetterman, P.S., Keith, E.S., Waller, C.W., Guerrero, O., Doorenbos, N.J. and Quimby, M.W. (1971) Mississippi-grown Cannabis sativa L.: preliminary observation on chemical definition of phenotype and variations in tetrahydrocannabinol content versus age, sex and plant part. J. Pharm. Sci.,60, 1246–1249. 
Formukong, E.A., Evans, A.T. and Evans, F.J. (1989) The medicinal uses of cannabis and its constituents. Phytother. Res.,3(6), 219–231. 
Fournier, G., Richez-Dumanois, C, Duvezin, J., Mathieu, J.P. and Paris, M. (1987) Identification of a new chemotype in Cannabis sativa: cannabigerol-dominant plants, biogenetic and agronomic prospects. Planta Med., 53(3), 277–280. 
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964a) Isolation, structure and partial synthesis of an active constituent of hashish. J. Am. Chem. Soc.,86, 1646–1647. 
Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964b). The structure and synthesis of cannabigerol a new hashish constituent. Proc. Chem. Soc., March, 82. 
Garrett, E.R. and Tsau, J. (1974) Stability of tetrahydrocannabinols I. J. Pharm. Sci.,63, 1563–1574. 
Gillan, R., Cole, M.D., Linacre, A., Thorpe, J.W. and Watson, N.D. (1995) A comparison of Cannabis sativa by random amplification of polymorphic DNA (RAPD) and HPLC of cannabinoids: a preliminary study. Science and Justice,35(3), 169–177. 
Grlic, L. (1968) A combined spectrophotometric differentiation of samples of Cannabis. Bull. Narc., 20(3), 25–29. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
THE CHEMISTRY 69 
Hammond, C.T. and Mahlberg, P.G. (1994) Phloroglucinol glucoside as a natural constituent of Cannabis sativa. Phytochem.,37(3), 755–756. 
Handrick, G.R., Uliss, D.B., Dalzell, H.C. and Razdan, R.K. (1979) Hashish: synthesis of (-)- delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and its biologically potent metabolite 3’-hydroxy-delta 9-THC. Tetrahedron Lett., 8, 681–684. 
Harvey, D.J. (1984) Chemistry, metabolism and pharmacokinetics of cannabinoids. In G.H.Nahas, (ed.), Marihuana in Science and Medicine, Raven Press, NY, pp. 40–43. Harvey, D.J. (1985) Examination of a 140 year old ethanolic extract of Cannabis: identification of new cannabitriol homologues and the ethylhomologue of cannabinol. In D.J.Harvey (ed.), Marihuana ‘84: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Cannabis, IRL Press, Oxford, pp. 23–30. 
Kajima, M. and Piraux, M. (1982) The biogenesis of cannabinoids in Cannabis sativa. Phytochem.,21(1), 67–69. 
Lehmann, T. and Brenneisen, R. (1995) High performance liquid chromatographic profiling of cannabis products, J. Liquid Chromatog., 18(4), 689–700. 
Mahlberg, P.G. and Hemphill, J.K. (1983) Effect of light quality on cannabinoid content of Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae). Bot. Gazette, 144, 43–48. 
Mechoulam, R. (1970) Marijuana chemistry. Science,168, 1159–1166. 
Mechoulam, R. (1973) Marihuana: Chemistry, Pharmacology, Metabolism and Clinical Effects, Academic Press, New York, London, pp. 1–99. 
Mechoulam, R. and Gaoni, Y. (1965) A total synthesis of dl-?1-tetrahydrocannabinol, the active constituent of hashish. J. Am. Chem. Soc.,87, 3273–3275. 
Mechoulam, R. and Gaoni, Y. (1967) Recent advances in the chemistry of hashish. In L.Zwxhmeister (ed.), Fortschritte Chemisch Organischer Naturstoffe, Vol. 25, Springer, Wien, pp. 175–213. 
Mechoulam, R., McCallum, N.K. and Burstein, S. (1976) Recent advances in the chemistry and biochemistry of cannabis. Chem. Rev.,76(1), 75–112. 
Ni, R. (1963) Part II. Studies on the biosynthesis of cannabinol and cannabidiol in Cannabis sativa. Thesis, University of Minnesota and University Microfilms Inc., Ann Arbor, Michigan. Paris, M. and Nahas, G.G. (1984) Botany: The unstabilised species. In G.G.Nahas (ed.), Marihuana in Science and Medicine, Raven Press, NY, pp. 3–36. 
Pate, D. (1983) Possible role of ultraviolet radiation in evolution of Cannabis chemotypes. Econ. Bot., 37(4), 396–405. 
Petrzilka, T., Haefliger, W. and Sikemeier, C. (1969) Synthese von Haschisch-Inhaltsstoffen. Helv. Chim. Acta, 52, 1102–1134. 
Phillips, R., Turk, R., Manno, J., Jain, N. and Forney, R. (1970) Seasonal variation in Cannabinolic content of Indiana marihuana. J. Forensic Sci.,15, 191–200. Razdan, R.K. (1973) Recent advances in the chemistry of cannabinoids. Prog. Org. Chem., 8, 78–101. 
Razdan, R.K. (1984) Chemistry and structure activity relationships of cannabinoids: an overview. In S.Agurell, W.L.Dewey, and R.E.Willette, (eds.), The Cannabinoids: Chemical, Pharmacological and Therapeutic Aspects, Academic Press Inc, Orlando, Florida, pp. 63–78. 
Razdan, R.K. and Handrick, G.R. (1970) Hashish: A stereospecific synthesis of (-)-delta-1-and (-)-delta-1(6)-tetrahydrocannabinols. J. Am. Chem. Soc.,92, 6061–6062. Razdan, R.K., Woodland, L.R. and Handrick, G.R. (1975) A one-step synthesis of (-)-delta-1- tetrahydrocannabinol from crysanthenol. Experientia, 31(1), 16–17. 
Ross, S.A. and El Sohly, M.A. (1996) The volatile oil composition of fresh and air-dried buds of Cannabis sativa. J. Nat. Prod.,59, 49–51. 
Sakakibara, I., Ikeya, Y., Hayashi, K. and Mitsuhashi, H. (1992) Three phenyldihydronaphthalene lignanamides from fruits of Cannabis sativa. Phytochem.,31(9), 3219–3223. 
Sakakibara, L, Katsuhara, T., Ikeya, Y., Hayashi, K. and Mitsuhashi, H. (1991) Cannabisin A, 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
70 AMALA RAMAN AND ALPANA JOSHI 
an arylnaphthalene lignanamide from fruits of Cannabis sativa. Phytochem.,30(9), 3013– 3016. 
Schultes, R.E. and Hoffman, A. (1980) Botany and Chemistry of the Hallucinogens, Charles C Thomas Publishers, Springfield, pp. 100–111. 
Shoyama, Y., Yagi, M., Nishioka, I. and Yamauchi, T. (1975) Biosynthesis of cannabinoid acids. Phytochem.,14, 2189–2192. 
Simonsen, J.L. and Todd, A.R. (1942) The essential oil from Egyptian hashish. J. Chem. Soc., 188–191. 
Slatkin, D.J., Doorenbos, N.J., Harris, L.S., Masoud, A.N., Quimby, M.W. and Schiff, P.L. (1971) Chemical constituents of Cannabis sativa L. root. J. Pharm. Sci.,60, 1891–1892. Small, E. and Beckstead, H.D. (1973) Common cannabinoid phenotypes in 350 stocks of Cannabis. Lloydia, 36, 144–165. 
Taura, F., Morimoto, S. and Shoyama, Y. (1995) Cannabinerolic acid, a cannabinoid from Cannabis sativa. Phytochem.,39(2), 457–458. 
Taylor, B.J., Neal, J.D. and Gough, T.A. (1985) The physical and chemical features of Cannabis grown in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from seeds of known origin—Part III: third and fourth generation studies. Bull. Narc., 37(4), 75–81. 
Turner, C.E. and El Sohly, M.A. (1979) Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. XVI. A possible decomposition pathway of 9-tetrahydrocannabinol to cannabinol. J. Heterocyclic Chem., 16, 1667–1668. 
Turner, C.E. and Hadley, K. (1973) Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. II Absence of cannabidiol in an African variant. J. Pharm. Sci,62(2), 251–255. 
Turner, C.E., El Sohly, H.N., Lewis, G.S., Lopez-Santibanez, I. and Carranza, I. (1982) Constituents of Cannabis sativa L., XX: the cannabinoid content of Mexican variants grown in Mexico and in Mississippi, United States of America. Bull. Narc., 34(1), 45–59. 
Turner, C.E., El Sohly, M.A. and Boeren, E.G. (1980) Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. XVII. A review of the natural constituents. J. Nat. Prod., 43(2), 169–234. 
Turner, C.E., Fetterman, P.S., Hadley, K.W. and Urbanek, J.E. (1975) Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. X: Cannabinoid profile of a Mexican variant and its possible correlation to pharmacological activity. Acta Pharm. Jugoslav.,25, 7–16. 
Turner, J.C. and Mahlberg, P.G. (1985) Cannabinoid synthesis in Cannabis sativa L. Am. J. Bot., 72(6), 911. 
Turner, C.E. (1980) Marijuana research and problems: an overview. Pharm. Int., 1, 93–96. Vogelmann, A.F., Turner, J.C. and Mahlberg, P.G. (1988) Cannabinoid composition in seedlings compared to adult plants of Cannabis sativa. J. Nat. Prod.,51(6), 1075–1079. Waller, C.W. and Scigliano, J.A. (1970) The national marihuana program. Report to the commission of problems of drug dependence. Natl. Acad. Sci NRC, 4, 28–32. Waller, C.W., Johnson, J.J., Buelke, J. and Turner, C.E. (1976) Marihuana: An Annotated Bibliography, Vol. I, Macmillan, New York. 
Waller, C.W., Baran, K.P., Urbanek, B.S. and Turner, C.E. (1980) Marihuana: An Annotated Bibliography, Supplement, Macmillan, New York. 
Waller, C.W., Baran, K.P., Urbanek, B.S. and Turner, C.E. (1981) Marihuana: An Annotated Bibliography, Supplement, Macmillan, New York. 
Waller, C.W., Nair, R.S., McAllister, A.F., Urbanek, B.S. and Turner, C.E. (1982) Marihuana: An Annotated Bibliography, Vol. II, Macmillan, New York. 
Waller, C.W., Urbanek, B.S. and Wall, G.M. (1985–86; 1987–88; 1989–90; 1991–92; 1993– 94) Marihuana: An Annotated Bibliography, Supplement, Macmillan, New York. Waller, C.W., Urbanek, B.S., Wall, G.M., Mack, J.E. and Turner, C.E. (1982) Marihuana: An Annotated Bibliography, Supplement, Macmillan, New York. 
Waller, C.W., Urbanek, B.S., Wall, G.M., Mack, J.E. and Turner, C.E. (1983–4) Marihuana: An Annotated Bibliography, Supplement, Macmillan, New York. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
4. ANALYTICAL AND LEGISLATIVE 
ASPECTS OF CANNABIS 
GEOFFREY F.PHILLIPS 
1 LEGAL DEFINITIONS 
This first section of Chapter 4 is concerned with forensic definitions of cannabis and its products as a controlled drug of abuse. Three following sections address related offences and attitudes, techniques used in forensic analysis, and the pharmaceutical quality of cannabis products. 
1.1 International Conventions and National Enactments 
The various international conventions and protocols, and the succession of ‘Dangerous Drugs’ legislation in the UK, are discussed in this section and summarised in Table 1. There is a long history of medicinal use and social abuse of Indian Hemp (see Chapter 1) but there were strong representations from some delegations to the 1923 
Opium Conference, notably reports of Egyptian experience, seeking to ban all non medicinal uses. In the subsequent 1925 (and 1931) League of Nations Conventions, the description of cannabis restricted the controlled drug to the female plant and named a particular species, Cannabis sativa, alias indica. In the UK, ‘Indian Hemp’ was dropped in the 1932 revision of the British Pharmacopoeia 1914 and non medicinal use was banned in 1928. 
This definition was maintained after World War II in the United Nations ‘Lake Success’ amending protocol, and in the UK in the corresponding Dangerous Drugs Act of 1951, through the wording: 
“Indian hemp is the dried flowering or fruiting tops of the pistillate plant known as Cannabis sativa [alt.indica] from which the resin has not been extracted”. 
In the United Nations comprehensive ‘Single Convention’ of 1961, which brought together many classes of narcotic and other drugs of abuse, the definition used in Article 1 removed this gender discrimination by describing Cannabis as— 
“the flowering or fruiting tops of the Cannabis plant (excluding the seeds and leaves when not accompanied by the tops) from which the resin has not been extracted, by whatever name they may be designated”; where cannabis plant “means any plant of the genus Cannabis”. 
In a corresponding national enactment, the UK Dangerous Drugs Act (DDA) 1964 recognised this widened scope of control by the crisper wording— 
“the flowering or fruiting tops of any plant of the genus cannabis from which the resin has not been extracted, by whatever name they may be designated”. 
71 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.
72 GEOFFREY F.PHILLIPS 
Table 1 Conventions and Enactments 
These extended definitions had the double advantage of bringing into international control the potentially quite potent male flowering tops and also of sidestepping taxonomic argument as to whether cannabis was a monospecific genus (see below, §1.2, and more detail in Chapter 2). The wider legal definition of cannabis was continued in the UK in the DDA 1965—which incorporated other narcotic substances newly specified in the UN 1961 Single Convention—and was further sustained in the consolidating enactment of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (MDA). 
In France, the production, marketing and use of “Indian hemp, plant and resin, their preparations; and THC and derivatives” (THC is discussed in §1.5) were prohibited except for research or laboratory purposes; there is reference in §2.1 to the French provision for authority for commercial cultivation of hemp fibre. In the UK, the MDA, s. 7(4), gave power for Regulations under the Act (MDR) to make production, supply and possession of specified Controlled Drugs unlawful (except for specified research purposes): Cannabis was placed on such a list in the MDR 1973 and hence became no longer available in clinical practice. 
Copyright © 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. Published by license under the Harwood Academic Publishers imprint, part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group.