Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology    
Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam - Printed in The Netherlands  
POLLEN-ANALYTIC EVIDENCE FOR THE CULTIVATION OF  CANNABIS IN ENGLAND  
H. GODWIN  
University Sub-department of Quaternary Research, Botany School, University of Cambridge,  Cambridge (Great Britain)  
(Received August 15, 1966)  
SUMMARY  
A detailed pollen diagram from an East Anglian Lake, Old Buckenham  Mere, registers vegetational changes from Late Glacial time to the present. When  a chronology is projected upon it this allows the reconstruction of the effects  of historic and prehistoric man upon local vegetation through the last 5,000 years.  Neolithic influence was slight, but in the Late Bronze Age and pre-Roman Iron  Age there was progressive forest clearance associated with pasturage. In Anglo 
Saxon time arable cultivation extended greatly upon heavier soils. Secale (rye)  was cultivated from the Roman time and from Early Anglo-Saxon time there  is a substantial continuous curve for a pollen grain recognisable as that of Cannabis  sativa (hemp), upon microscopic criteria newly defined. It was locally cultivated in  large amount in Late Saxon and Norman time when the region was heavily  populated and in Tudor time cultivation of this crop was enforceable by law.  
INTRODUCTION  
Consideration of the early history of hemp indicates that it spread from  Central Asia into Greece and Italy in classical time, but there is no good evidence  for the cultivation of hemp in northwestern Europe before the birth of Christ.  There is some insecure evidence that it may have accompanied arable cultivation  in the Roman period near Oslo and in northwest England. With the subsequent  folk migrations that brought the Anglo-Saxons to England the evidence for  cultivation of hemp becomes strong and widespread from Scandinavia to East  Anglia and western France. These were people who cleared the lowland oak 
forests, cultivated the heavier soils with large ox-team plough and grew rye (Secale)  as an important crop. It is likely that these people brought the knowledge of hemp  with them in their westwards migrations from eastern Europe, as also its teutonic  name. As we have seen there is good evidence of cultivation in Viking and Norman  
Rev. Palaeobotan. Palynol., 4 (1967) 71-80 71 
times and in England certainly its growth, legally enforced in Tudor times, has  continued until the nineteenth century at least.    
RECOGNITION OF CANNABIS POLLEN  
Towards the top of several Postglacial pollen diagrams in western Europe  there appears a substantial curve for a grain described as "Humulus" or "Humulus Cannabis". It was the presence of a curve of this kind in the upper part of a long  diagram from Old Buckenham Mere, south Norfolk that led Dr. D. M. Churchill,  of the Sub-department of Quaternary Research, Cambridge, to attempt microscop ic resolution of the differences between pollen of Humulus lupulus and of Cannabis  sativa. He adduced differentiating characters that may be summarised as follows.  Firstly, in optical section the rim of the pore in Cannabis is seen to have a hollow  internal annulus or void between the ectexine and the endexine: this is absent or  much smaller in Humulus. Secondly, in the pollen of Cannabis, the tectum of the  annulus rises very steeply above the general surface and arches over the rim of  the pore extending down inside the grain below the general level of the inner wall  (endexine). This is particularly noticeable when the tectum breaks free from the  endexine inside the pore. Thirdly, in most pollen grains of Humulus and in some  grains of Cannabis, the outline of the pore, when seen in polar view, rises with a  very low slope above the general level of the outer wall, in contrast to the steep  external slope of the pore in the majority of Cannabis grains.  
The fossil pollen grains from Old Buckenham Mere corresponded far more  closely, upon these criteria, to Cannabis than to Humulus pollen and indeed it  was not possible to find fossil pollen from Old Buckenham Mere which could  be unequivocally matched with grains of present day Humulus. Thus, although  precise identification could not be applied to all the fossil grains, it seems likely  that the bulk if not all of them are referable to Cannabis.  
The pollen diagram (Fig. 1 and 2) appears to present a continuous vegetational  record from early zone VII up to the present day. Although there is clear evidence  of a hiatus which removed most or all of the deposits of zones V and VI at this  borehole, thereafter deposition seems to have been uninterrupted. The open water  calcareous muds are unsuitable for radiocarbon age determination. It is however  possible to construct a rough time scale by using the date 0 B.C, for the beginning  of the curve for Secale (400 cm), which is not known before Roman time in Britain.  The earliest (Neolithic) forest clearances then fall close to 3033 B.C., and the  average rate of formation is about 1000 years for each metre of deposit.  
Making use of this conjectural but reasonable time scale, it is now extremely  interesting to consider how the anthropogenic influences disclosed by the pollen  diagrams correspond with the known prehistoric and historic evidence for the  region, particularly with regard to the curve indicative of cultivation of Cannabis.  The pollen of Plantago lanceolata appears in small amounts in the Neolithic  
72 Rev. Palaeobotan. Palvnol., 4(1967) 71--80 
CA4  
OLD BUCKENHAH MERE 1963  
/~',qC.~A, TI~e'S OF ,rOlL T,Q~" /:~/.,/.~V  
~l ' ' , ~ F~r-'r F~- I .... F~-I~-F~-I ....... r-~r~-F-~r~-~-r~-F-~r~-F-~Pl , ,., , i  
I  
I  
! I SC,LL~  
IL  
~I~'URIALIS  
VIBJ~N  
I  
p tl  
tl  
II  I  
l:i l    
i1"11 12:  r ! r , r  
I I M~CUR~_rS  r I I  
p I )  
I  
I , , , , I , , , I t , I , , LI , I , , , , k..~l_.~_l_~l ....... I~_1 , L.LI , L.~L~_L~_I , I_a_l , I~ I,I , , , ~ F  0 40 800 600 400 600 0 40 800 0 0 0 40 60 80 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 O0 I00  
BETULA PINUS ULMU$ TILIA F,~US CORYLUS SALIX VIBURNUN ACER  G~A.~RCUS /~'~IUS FRAXINUS EPHEDRA JUNIPERUS ILEX HEDEI~  
AP/NAP  
CARPINUS JUGLANS VISCUN RHAi~INL~, EUONYNUS  
LONICERA PRUNUS CRATAEGLIS  
Fig.1. Pollen diagram from borehole 2, Old Buckenham Mere: pollen of trees and shrubs, and  associated woodland genera; on the right the ratio of arboreal to non-arboreal pollen; on the  left the conjectural time scale. A considerable discontinuity exists at the level 850-900 cm: below  this the deposits are Late Glacial.  
Rev. Palaeobotan. Palynol., 4 (1967) 71-80 73 
OLD BUCKENHAM MERE 1963  
t  
Fig.2. Pollen diagram from borehole 2, Old Buckenham Mere: pollen of herbaceous plants  associated with forest clearance, pasture indicators on the left and arable on the right. On the  extreme right the ratio of pasture to arabIe indicator pollen, on the extreme left the conjectural  time scale. The increased emphasis on arable cultivation in Anglo-Saxon and Norman time is  evident and is clearly correlated with cultivation of Secale (rye), Cannabis (hemp) and Linum (flax).  
74 Rev. Palaeobotan. Palynol., 4 (1967) 71-80 
of our diagram, shews a slight increase in the Middle Bronze Age, more in the  Late Bronze Age and reaches a considerable maximum in the pre-Roman and  Roman Iron Age, declining afterwards to more or less steady low values in  Anglo-Saxon and later times. This pollen type is accompanied and paralleled  by curves for Rumex, Artemisia and Ranunculus, so that, taken with the arboreal/  non-arboreal pollen ratio, we are presented with a picture of slight and temporary  clearances in the Neolithic and Early and Middle Bronze Age, moderate disforest   
ation in the Late Bronze Age and rapidly extended disforestation in the pre-Roman  and Roman Iron Age. This latest clearance was very largely associated with  pasturage however as might be expected from the fact that this is a region of re latively heavy clay soils: we note that the associated Centaurea pollen hereabouts is  C. nigra and not C. cyanus.  
This predominantly pastoral phase is followed by one which unmistakeably  indicates widespread arable cultivation and, so far as the time scale can be trusted,  it began about 400 A.D. the time when settlement of the area by Anglo-Saxon  invaders took place. The curves for Secale, Linum and Cannabis are strikingly  similar and are accompanied by frequencies of Compositae, Chenopodiaceae  and Cruciferae that remain high within what we take to be the Anglo-Saxon and  subsequent periods to about 1300 or 1400 A.D. It is notable also that in lower  frequencies we have Spergula arvensis and Urtica in the Anglo-Saxon period,  Convolvulus arvensis, Agrostemma githago and Centaurea cyanus in the Saxon  and Norman periods, with Vicia, Knautia and Valerianella at the Cannabis maxi mum which, on this time scale, appears to be between 800 and 1200 A.D. These  highly characteristic weeds of arable crops, especially such as rye and flax, confirm  the indication of an extensive arable cultivation gaining momentum in the Late  Saxon and Norman periods, but suffering a considerable set-back at what seems  to be about the fourteenth century A.D.  
When we attempt to see this against the background of archaeological  events we are fortunate in being able to call upon the publications of the late Dr.  R. R. Clarke for East Anglia as a whole and for the Norwich area in particular  (CLARKE, 1960), both embracing the area of Old Buckenham. The following  major features of economy and population at successive periods emerge. The  Bronze Age inhabitants are regarded as "nomadic pastoralists" without permanent  settlement sites; they supplemented stock-raising by hunting and hoe agriculture  and to judge from the frequency of hoards, the population increased greatly in  the Late Bronze Age. Iron Age "A", "B" and "C" people were immigrant peasant  farmers who herded sheep and oxen and who cultivated cereals. Like their pre 
decessors they favoured upland sites and easily worked soils which were tilled  with a one-ox plough in small square fields, commonly spoken of as "Celtic"  fields. Their populations in upland Norfolk do not seem to have been dense, but  here as in other parts of Britain there is indication of spinning and weaving.  The Romanisation of Norfolk was tardy and less intense than in other areas of  
Rev. Palaeobotan. Palynol., 4 (1967) 71-80 75 
Britain, possibly because the Early Roman period was marked by the abortive  revolt of the Iceni under Bondicca and its subsequent cruel suppression. This  evidence agrees with the continued main emphasis upon pastoralism and the slight  extension of agriculture evident for the heavy soil area up to the end of the Roman  occupation in the middle of the fourth century A.D.    
Anglo-Saxon invasions began in the middle of the third century and by A.D.  500 there was substantial occupation in several parts of the region, it is evident  that the Anglo-Saxon multiple ox-team allowed the immigrant farmers to clear and  cultivate the heavier soils, a fact very sharply reflected in the place names of the  region which are overwhelmingly Anglo-Saxon. The Kingdom of East Anglia  with its capital at Thetford, 12 miles southwest of Old Buckenham became polit 
ically and economically powerful, and despite the passing effects of Danish raids  and Danish hegemony "by 1066 A.D., East Anglia was the most densely populated  area in England, and by this date Thetford itself boasted no less than twelve  churches". Clarke continues that "medieval Norfolk was a rich county, and its  wealth was created by the efficient system of agriculture inherited from Late  Saxon time and augmented by industrial activities". This picture of forest clearance  and arable cultivation, moderate in Early and Middle Saxon time and very exten 
sive in the Later Saxon time, coincides to a quite remarkable degree with what  we have read into the pollen evidence.  
Ralph Gauder, Earl of Norfolk owned Old Buckenham in the reign of  Edward the Confessor but fled the country at the Conquest. Norman occupation  established a feudal control of the region without impairment of the rural economy,  and about 1150 A.D. were built the Norman Castle and the Augustinian Priory  of New Buckenham, in replacement of the pre-existing castle at Old Buckenham,  only 1.5 miles away. It is not unreasonable to see the great (and selective) decrease  in Quercus after 800 A.D. on our interpolated time scale as the consequence of  the local building needs during Late Saxon and Norman time, just as the great  expansion of arable cultivation and the maximum of Cannabis cultivation may  reasonably be associated with this period. It is tempting to attribute the pronounced  decline which followed (putatively in the fourteenth century) to the ravages of  the Black Death which halved the population of many parts of Britain, but other  causes were operating in the same sense and Clarke writes that "from the Later  Middle Ages unsuccessful farming on marginal lands caused the abandonment of  many villages, especially in Breckland" and "the Middle Ages in Norfolk  ended in a welter of destruction. Civil strife exploded in Kett's formidable revolt  of 1549, there was depression in the woollen industry and disturbance in the  countryside with increasing rural depopulation".  
Over and above the anthropogenic effects there are a great many more  features of interest and importance arising from consideration of the pollen  diagrams but these will be left for publication elsewhere. We may summarise by  saying that the historical accounts conform extraordinarily well with the deduc 
76 Rev. Palaeobotan. Palym,l., 4 (1967) 71-80 
tions based upon the Old Buckenham Mere pollen diagrams and lend surprising  support to the conjectural time scale. In particular they support the proposition  that pastoralism was locally prevalent throughout the pre-Roman and Roman  Iron Age, that it was not until the arrival of Anglo-Saxon peoples that arable  cultivation preponderated in the region, that there was great disforestation and  arable cultivation in Late Saxon and Norman time, and that there was pronounced  recession of activity around the fourteenth century.    
Within the historical context just outlined it would seem that Cannabis  first appeared in the neighbourhood of Old Buckenham Mere with the establishment  of the Anglo-Saxon farmers, and that its cultivation was greatly expanded in  Late Saxon and Norman time. From the fourteenth century onwards it seems to  have been grown in small amount until comparatively recently for there is a sub 
stantial rise in its pollen frequencies at the top of the diagram, possibly referring  to the eighteenth or nineteenth centuries.  
EUROPEAN POLLEN EVIDENCE (FIG.3)  
In 1952, WELTEN describing a pollen diagram from Spiezerbucht on the  shore of Lake Thun (560 m) directed attention to the substantial curve for a pollen  type that he attributed to Cannabis. It was present to the extent of 10-13 ~o of the  total pollen along with high frequencies of such indicators of arable cultivation  as Cerealia and Centaurea cyanus as well as Plantago lanceolata, and greatly in 
creased total non-arboreal pollen. On the basis of the tree-pollen zonation, of the  varve chronology that he had earlier linked with it, and of subsequent general  confirmation by radiocarbon dating, Welten was able to date the Cannabis pollen  curve, rightly claiming this as the first established proof of cultivation of hemp  in Switzerland. In low frequency it was present in the folk migration period shortly  after Roman times, but the high maxima clearly indicative of cultivation seem to  have occurred about 1100-1600 A.D.  
HAFSTEN (1956) at two sites Hogstadvann and BS.rsrudvann in the inner Oslo  Fiord area of Norway reported pollen of Humulus-Cannabis type that attained  45 ~ of the non-arboreal pollen, along with all the indicators of arable cultivation  including flax. Scattered grains of this type from all the previous pollen zones  could well be due to wild Humulus, but the high frequencies probably represent  cultivated hemp. There is a continuous curve of low values from the beginning  of zone IX (ca. 300 B.C.) with high maxima at dates which I estimate by interpo 
lation to be around 0-500 A.D.  
At Osbysj6 in eastern Sweden FRIES (1962) has reported a curve of Cannabis Humulus type pollen amounting to 10~ or more of the total tree pollen. The  curve is continuous from a date that can be guessed by interpolation from the  zone boundaries to be about 150 A.D., but the maximum values can be placed at  about 850-1200 A.D., the Viking period. The C-H curve is not here very closely  
Rev. Palaeobotan. PalynoL, 4 (1967) 71-80 77 
  
  
  

2l?uu I  
I  
1500  1000  500  
I BLACK DEATH    
NORMAN    
VIKING  
--_-- ______  
ANGLO -  
8 SAXON  -__- -__---.  
I    
,O  
ROMAN 0 -  BRITISt -  
-I  
I PRE - ROMAN  
500 ’ I  B.C.  
IRON AGE    
___--__- .--.    BRONZE ACI  
Fig.3. Summary of pollen-analytic evidence for cultivation of Cannabis in western Europe.    
This is presumed where pollen of Cannabis itself or Cannabis-Humulus type is present in continuous  
but low frequencies (thin line) or in high frequencies (thick line): sporadic low frequencies are  
omitted. The attribution of date is based on my own assessment, generally following that of the  
originaJ author when it has been attempted.  
correlated with other indices of arable cultivation but there is a continuous curve  
for Secale from ca. 0 B.C. with high values after 1100 A.D. on the same conjectural  
time scale.  
FRIES (1958) also reported similar evidence from Spansjon and Kroppsjiin  
in Vastergotland in southwestern Sweden where he suggests that “from about  
the migration period and for some centuries thereafter hemp (Cannabis) was  
locally cultivated.” We may take this to be perhaps between 400 and 1200 A.D.  
This is clearly associated with extensive arable farming and the cultivation of rye.  
ANDERSON (1954) reported from Bundso in S. Jutland a curve of Humulus 
Cannabis type closely associated with all the indicators of arable cultivation.  
The maximum was dated about 1600 A.D. by the fact that it closely followed a  great agricultural recession which was taken to be that due to the Black Death  
in the fourteenth century. Anderson reviews the evidence carefully and takes the  
curve as pointing to the cultivation of Cannabis.  
From Sehestedt on the northwestern German coast, WIERMANN (1965)  
reports a substantial “Humulus” curve very well paralleled by clearance indicators,  
especially those of arable ground, i.e., cereals, Cruciferae and Centaurea cyanus.  
78 Rev. Palaeobotan. Palynol., 4 (1967) 71-80 

From consideration of known periods of agricultural regression and pollen zone  ages reconsidered in the light of recent radiocarbon dating for the region, it might  be said that the curve was intermittent from 500 B.C., continuous but low from  ca. 400 A.D. and high after ca. 1400 A.D.  
From northwestern France come two important sources of evidence.  CORILLION and PLANCHAIS (1963) report from Mayenne high values for Cannabis  type pollen associated with Secale and weeds of arable ground within the Sub atlantic period and draw attention to historical evidence for the widespread  cultivation of hemp in the region from the eleventh to the eighteenth centuries  A.D. From sites further west in Finist6re VAN ZEIST (1964) has also reported  substantial values for the Cannabis-Hurnulus curve associated with arable cultiva tion of Secale. From radiocarbon dates at the sites of pollen analysis we may by  interpolation deduce that the continuous curve was low from 600 A.D. and high  after about 850 A.D.  
BRITISH POLLEN EVIDENCE (FIG.3)  
WALKER (1955) reported extremely high values for the "Humulus type"  pollen curve at the top of a series from Skelsmergh Tarn, a small lake in south  Westmorland. This curve accompanies the introduction of cereals and greatly  increased values for grasses, Rumex and Plantago. An extension of the time scale  lower in the diagram suggests a Romano-British date for this agricultural episode,  but this remains only conjectural. At Ellerside Moss, at no great distance from  Skelsmergh, OLDFIELD (1963)distinguishes a series of clearance and forest-regener ation phases, and with the most recent clearance (G), referred to the period 1550-  1800, there are substantial amounts of pollen of Humulus-Cannabis type, along  with greatly increased frequencies of Plantago, Pteridium, Rumex, Artemisia and  Cerealia. Similar results were obtained also from Urswick Tarn nearby (OLDFIELD  
and STATHAM, 1963). At Chat Moss to the west of Manchester, BIRKS (1964)  describes a "Humulus type" curve near the top of the pollen-sequence, coinciding  with the onset of a curve for pollen of cereals and a large increase in Plantago  lanceolata. The main recurrence surface on this bog has now been radiocarbon  dated to about 900 B.C., and by interpolation between this and the present day  bog surface the "Humulus" maximum would lie between ca. 900 and 1500 A.D.  The same author (BIRKS, 1965) working on deposits at Lindow Moss, Cheshire,  finds a Cannabis-Humulus curve associated with two distinct cultivation episodes  of an alternating series of cultivation and forest regeneration stages that he dates  by comparison of regional pollen zonation and bog-stratigraphy together with  some reference to radiocarbon dating. At the first such episode, referred to the  Romano-British period, there is the beginning of cereal cultivation (mainly Secale)  with high values for the Cannabis-Humulus and increased Chenopodiaceae and  Artemisia percentages as well as indications of extensive pastoralism. Pollen of the  
Rev. Palaeobotan. PalynoL, 4 (1967) 71-80 79 
Cannabis-Humulus type t¥om the later clearance episode has been referred to  Dr. Churchill and Miss Andrew who have confirmed that it is of Cannabis: this  episode is placed in the Tudor period during which there is historical evidence  that hemp was grown locally.  
The low and irregular values for Humulus-Cannabis pollen in zones VIlb  and VIII at Dartmoor (StMMONDS, 1964) afford rather too slight a basis for de ducing the cultivation of hemp or hops.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
It is my pleasurable duty to thank many who have helped me in this research  project. The pollen cores were originally obtained by Dr, R. G. West and Professor  J. Gordon Ogden Ill, and the systematic analyses were made by my assistant,  Miss Robin Andrew who checked and adopted the criteria for identification of  Cannabis pollen suggested by Dr. D. M. Churchill. l received effective help from  many archaeologists and historians, and I hope to present elsewhere a statement  of the purely historical evidence for the European use and cultivation of hemp.  
REFERENCES  
ANDERSON, A., 1954. Two standard diagrams from South Jutland. Danmarks Geol. Undersogelse,  II, 80: 188-209.  
BmKS, H. J. B., 1964. Chat Moss, Lancashire. Mere. Proc. Manchester Lit. Phil. Soc., 106: 2246.  BIRKS, H. J. B., 1965. Pollen analytical investigations at Holcroft Moss, Lancashire and Lindow  Moss, Cheshire. J. Ecol., 53: 299-314.  
CLARKE, R. R., 1960. East Anglia. Thames and Hudson, London, 240 pp.  CORILL1ON, R. et PLANCHAIS, N., 1963. Recherches sur la v6g6tation actuelle et passee d'une lande  torbeuse Armoricaine: Malingue (Meyenne). Pollen Spores, 5:273 386.  
FRIES, M., 1958. Vegetationsutvekling och odlinghistoria i Varnhemstrakten. Acta Phytogeograph.  Sueccia, 39: 1-63.  
FRIES, M., 1962. Studies of the sediments and the vegetational history ill the Osbysj6 Basin,  north of Stockholm. Oikos, 13: 76-96.  
HAFSTEN, U., 1956. Pollen analytic investigations on the Late-Quaternary development in the  inner Oslo Fjord area./~rbok Univ. Bergen, Mat. NaturE. Ser., 8:1-162.  
OLDFrELD, F., 1963. Pollen analysis and man's role in the ecological history of the southeast Lake  District. Geografiska Ann., 45: 2340.  
OLDFIELD, F. and STATFIAM, D. C., 1963. Pollen-analytical data from Urswick Tarn and Ellerside  Moss, North Lancashire. New Phytologist, 62: 53-66.  
SIMMONDS, I. G., 1964. Pollen analyses from Dartmoor. New Phytologist, 63:165-180.  VAN ZEIST, W., 1964. A palaeobotanical study of some bogs in western Brittany (Finist6re),  France. Palaeohist., 10:157-180.  
WALKER, D., 1955. Studies in the Postglacial history of British vegetation. XIV. Skelsmergh  Tarn and Kentmere, Westmorland. New Phytologist, 54:222 254.  
WELTEN, M., 1952. Qber die sp~it- und postglaciale Vegetationsgeschichte des Simmentals.  Veri~ffentl. Geobotan. Inst. Riibel, Ziirieh, 26:l-135.  
WIERMANN, R., 1965. Moorkundliche und vegetationsgeschichtliche Betrachtungen zum Aus sendeichsmoor bei Sehestedt (Jadebusen). Ber. Deut. Botan. Ges., 78: 269-278.  
80 Rev. Palaeobotan. Pulymd., 4 (1967) 71-80