Analysis 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-021-00691-w 
The greenhouse gas emissions of indoor cannabis  production in the United States 
Hailey M. Summers   , Evan Sproul    and Jason C. Quinn   ✉ 
The legalization of cannabis has caused a substantial increase in commercial production, yet the magnitude of the industry’s  environmental impact has not been fully quantified. A considerable amount of legal cannabis is cultivated indoors primarily  for quality control and security. In this study we analysed the energy and materials required to grow cannabis indoors and  quantified the corresponding greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions using life cycle assessment methodology for a cradle-to-gate  system boundary. The analysis was performed across the United States, accounting for geographic variations in meteoro 
logical and electrical grid emissions data. The resulting life cycle GHG emissions range, based on location, from 2,283 to  5,184 kg CO2-equivalent per kg of dried flower. The life cycle GHG emissions are largely attributed to electricity production  and natural gas consumption from indoor environmental controls, high-intensity grow lights and the supply of carbon dioxide  for accelerated plant growth. The discussion focuses on the technological solutions and policy adaptation that can improve  the environmental impact of commercial indoor cannabis production. 
Understanding the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of com mercial cannabis production is essential for consumers,  
the general public and policy makers to improve decision  making to mitigate the effects of climate change. Since recreational  legalization was pioneered in Colorado in 2012, the US legal can nabis industry has rapidly grown from a US$3.5 billion industry  to US$13.6 billion in annual sales, with states like Colorado sell ing more than 530 tonnes of legally grown cannabis product every  year1,2. Additionally, with 48% of adults in the United States having  tried cannabis at some point in their life and 13% of adults hav ing consumed in the last year, substantial demand exists at the con sumer level3. Despite its rapid growth and widespread use, there is  minimal quantitative understanding of the GHG emissions from  legal indoor cannabis cultivation. 
The initial amendment legalizing recreational cannabis in  Colorado required the majority of cannabis product to be sold at  a collocated retail location4. This restriction led to cultivation prac tices occurring within the city limits of Denver, CO. This, along  with security, theft and quality concerns, consequently led to the  cultivation of cannabis indoors. Although data concerning the exact  amount of cannabis by cultivation method are not currently publicly  available for the United States, a recent survey of producers in North  America showed that 41% of respondents indicated that their grow  operations occur solely indoors5. It is well known that indoor can 
nabis cultivation requires significant energy input, reflected in high  utility bills and industry reports4,6–9. However, many of these large  energy loads, along with other material inputs required to cultivate  indoor cannabis, have not yet been equated to GHG emissions. 
Previously, rudimentary quantifications of GHG emissions  from indoor cannabis have been performed by equating emissions  with electricity use from monthly bills6,7. However, this approach  omits additional GHG emissions from other energy sources, such  as natural gas, upstream GHG emissions from the production and  use of material inputs, and downstream GHG emissions from the  handling of waste. The most thorough report quantifying GHG  emissions from indoor cannabis is from Mills10, which states that  growing 1 kg of cannabis indoors releases 4,600 kg of carbon dioxide  
equivalent (CO2e). However, the scope of the work was intended to  be a central estimate, representing a singular US location case study  for the industry’s general practices. Furthermore, Mills10 conducted  this study prior to legalization and only used data from small-scale  experimental systems, thus lacking validation of full-scale com 
mercial grow operations. Since Mills’ work10, minimal research has  been carried out to improve GHG emissions quantification or to  investigate the geographic effects of growing indoor cannabis. To  fill this knowledge gap, we have quantified the GHG emissions of  commercial indoor cannabis production using life cycle assessment  (LCA) methodology and expanded the scope to include geographic  effects across the United States. The results of our investigation are  presented in this article. 
An indoor cannabis cultivation model was developed to track  the necessary energy and materials required to grow cannabis  year-round in an indoor, warehouse-like environment. This envi ronment maintains climate conditions as required for the cannabis  plants, yielding a consistent product regardless of weather condi tions. The model calculates the necessary energy to maintain these  indoor climate conditions by using a year’s worth of hourly weather  data from more than 1,000 locations in the United States11. The  analysed locations are independent of current legal status and rep resent hypothetical grow facilities in all 50 US states. The model  then converts the required energy, supplied from electricity and  natural gas, into GHG emissions through electrical grid emissions  data from 26 regions in the United States12 and life cycle inventory  (LCI) data13,14. Additionally, the model accounts for the upstream,  or cradle-to-gate, GHG emissions from the production and trans portation of material inputs such as water, fertilizers, fungicides and  bottled carbon dioxide (CO2) supplied for increased plant growth as  well as the downstream process of waste handled in a landfill. The  resulting cumulative GHG emissions for annual indoor cannabis  cultivation across the United States, represented as kilogram CO2e  per kilogram of dried cannabis flower (kgCO2e kg–1), is presented  in Fig. 1a. 
The results presented in Fig. 1a are a combination of modelled  natural gas consumption (Fig. 1b), electricity consumption (Fig. 1c)  
Mechanical Engineering, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA. ✉e-mail: jason.quinn@colostate.edu Nature Sustainability | www.nature.com/natsustain
Analysis Nature Sustainability a   
Electricity region boundaries   
Areas in multiple regions 
GHG emissions (kgCO2e per kg of dried flower) 
2,200 5,200 
b c d 
  
Electricity region boundaries 
Electricity region boundaries 
Natural gas consumption (MJ per kg of dried flower) Electricity consumption (kWh per kg of dried flower)   Areas in multiple regions GHG emissions (gCO2e kWh–1)       
12,300 66,900 1,700 5,300 ≤245 ≤376 ≤505 ≤636 ≤766 
Fig. 1 | Life cycle GHG emissions and energy intensities from indoor cannabis cultivation modelled across the United States. a, Cumulative GHG emissions  from cultivating cannabis indoors interpolated within eGRID electricity region boundaries. eGRID, Emissions and Generation Resource Integrated Database.  b, Natural gas required to maintain indoor environmental conditions. c, Electricity required to maintain indoor environmental conditions and high-intensity  grow lights. d, GHG emissions for the US electricity regions modelled. Full resolution figures are provided in Supplementary Figs. 1–4. 
combined with geographically resolved GHG emissions for electric  grid mix (Fig. 1d), and upstream and downstream GHG emissions.  The resulting GHG emissions range from 2,283 to 5,184kgCO2e kg–1),  observed in Long Beach, CA and Kaneohe Bay, HI, respectively,  with a median value for all locations analysed of 3,658kgCO2e kg–1.  As these results are independent of current legal status within indi vidual states, these findings should not be interpreted as represent 
ing the current reality of the industry. Rather, the results represent  GHG emissions if the cultivation method in each location were  selected to be indoors. 
The results in Fig. 1 show that a wide variation in GHG emis sions from indoor cannabis cultivation exists across the United  States. Regional trends show that areas such as the Mountain West  and Midwestern United States are especially intensive for grow ing cannabis indoors. To better understand the factors that lead  to variations in GHG emissions across the United States, Fig. 2 illustrates the contributions to the total GHG emissions in ten  geographically and meteorologically diverse locations. The loca tions shown in Fig. 2 capture the full range of GHG emissions  
results, from the minimum of Long Beach, CA to the maximum of  Kaneohe Bay, HI, with a single location selected from the regions of  Pacific Northwest, Pacific Southwest, Desert Southwest, Northeast,  Southeast, Mountain West, East North Central, West North  Central, Alaska and Hawaii. In addition, these ten locations repre 
sent large populations within US states that have legalized cannabis  sales (either medical, recreational or both) and are in unique elec tricity regions. The results are shown on the basis of per kg of dried  flower as total production quantities and cultivation method data  are not publicly available. For each location, GHG emissions were  divided into process categories to understand the largest contribu tors. Despite geographic variations, certain variables were shown  to be consistently large contributors to the overall GHG emissions.  These variables include indoor environmental controls by heating,  ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), required to maintain  indoor temperature and humidity, as well as high-intensity grow  
lights and the supply of CO2 for increased plant growth. The HVAC systems are responsible for modifying air tempera ture and humidity to an allowable range before being supplied to  
Nature Sustainability | www.nature.com/natsustain
Nature Sustainability Analysis 
600 
500 
5,500 5,000 4,500 
400 300 200 100 
Water 
Fans 
Suppl. dehumidifier Suppl. heater 
Suppl. air conditioner Nutrients 
Life cycle GHG emissions (kgCO2e kg–1)Other 
4,000 
0 
Chicago, IL 
Jacksonville, FL 
Kaneohe Bay, HI 
Plant protection Soil 
3,500 3,000 2,500 
Seattle, WA 
Long Beach, CA 
Phoenix, AZ 
New York, NY 
Denver, CO 
St. Louis, MO 
Anchorage, AK 
2,000 1,500 1,000 500 
0 
–500 
Seattle, WA 
Jacksonville, FL 
Chicago, IL 
Kaneohe Bay, HI 
HVAC heating and cooling HVAC humidity management Grow lights 
Transportation 
Waste 
Growth CO2 
Stored CO2 
Net GHGs 
Long Beach, CA 
Phoenix, AZ 
New York, NY 
St. Louis, MO 
Anchorage, AK 
Denver, CO 
Fig. 2 | Breakdown of life cycle GHG emissions contributions from indoor cannabis cultivation. GHG emissions from indoor cannabis production at ten  of the 1,011 locations modelled. The GHG emissions totals represent individual simulation results based on modelling input parameters specific to each  location. The positive values represent released GHG emissions and the negative value represents stored GHG emissions based upon the model system  
boundary. The HVAC labels in the main figure refer to the major equipment used to manipulate outside air to meet inside condition criteria, whereas  the indoor environmental controls in ‘Other’ are supplemental (suppl.) systems representing additional equipment located inside grow rooms that aid in  maintaining environmental conditions. 
the cannabis plants. This is critical to maintaining plant health as  sudden changes in temperature and humidity can shock the plants  and ultimately lead to crop damage and product loss. Additionally,  cannabis plants require a regular supply of fresh air to help mod 
erate humidity and oxygen levels. In this work, an air supply rate  of 30 volumetric air changes per hour (ACH) was assumed. This  value represents the average value from the literature, which reports  values as high as 60ACH and as low as 12ACH (Supplementary  Table 1). For comparison, the recommended ventilation for homes  is 0.35ACH and operating rooms in hospitals require a minimum  of 15ACH15,16. Air condition modifications and supply by HVAC  are cumulatively shown to be the largest contributor to overall GHG  emissions regardless of location (see Supplementary Table 2 for all  contributions). The contributions to GHG emissions from HVAC  also infer that locations with lower GHG emissions are better suited  meteorologically for indoor cannabis cultivation than locations  with large GHG emissions as fewer modifications to the outside air  conditions are required. 
Categorized in Fig. 2 are HVAC processes that include modi fication to air humidity, labelled as HVAC humidity management  (latent loads), and air temperature, labelled as HVAC heating and  cooling (sensible loads). These processes represent annual energy  demand for modifying air delivered to all stages of plant life cycle,  including clone, vegetative, flowering and curing (also known as  drying). HVAC humidity management largely depends on geo graphic variability, as in the case of Jacksonville, FL and Kaneohe  Bay, HI, where dehumidifying the consistently hot and humid  outside air to desired temperature and humidity ranges requires  
Nature Sustainability | www.nature.com/natsustain
significant energy through electric HVAC equipment. HVAC  heating and cooling of air are shown to be major GHG emissions  contributors in geographic locations where humidity ranges are  acceptable, but average outside temperatures are consistently dif 
ferent from those of the desired indoor requirements for cannabis  plants (15.6–29.4 °C). These conditions are observed most signifi cantly in Denver, CO and Anchorage, AK. The results, as illus trated in Fig. 2, also indicate that at some locations, the supplied  air conditions from HVAC at 30ACH are sufficient to overcome  the increased heat and humidity from lights and plants, respec tively, while other locations require the use of additional supple mental equipment to keep inside conditions within tolerance. This  categorization of supplemental environmental control equipment  is shown in the breakdown of ‘Other’, as supplemental dehumidi fiers, air conditioners and heaters. This equipment is turned on in  the model when the HVAC equipment cannot maintain acceptable  temperature and humidity ranges at the air supply rate of 30ACH.  All the supplemental systems were modelled as having an electric  power supply and are cumulatively shown to have a minor contri bution to the overall GHG emissions at the modelled air exchange  rate. Specifically, for the ten locations shown in Fig. 2, the supple mental dehumidifiers were never operated because the frequency  of ACH was able to maintain the required indoor humidity levels.  Additionally, the supplemental heaters and air conditioners varied  in use, but contributed less than 2% of the total GHG emissions in  all locations. 
The second most significant GHG emissions contributor  observed universally is from high-intensity grow lights. Lighting  
Analysis Nature Sustainability 
Life cycle GHG emissions 
(kgCO2e kg–1) 
9,000 8,000 7,000 6,000 5,000 4,000 3,000 2,000 1,000 0 
Seattle, WA 
Jacksonville, FL 
Chicago, IL 
60 ACH 
50 ACH 
40 ACH 
30 ACH (Baseline) 
20 ACH 
10 ACH 
Kaneohe Bay, HI 
The results from the high-resolution, geographically resolved model  identify specific aspects of indoor growth that lead to substantial  GHG emissions. This insight can be applied to states with existing  legal indoor practices and during policy and regulation develop 
ment prior to individual state legalization. 
For states that have already legalized medical and recreational  cannabis, these results can be used to better understand what pro cesses are the largest contributors to overall GHG emissions and  therefore focus efforts toward modifying current practices to reduce  GHG emissions. Namely, these findings can be used to develop  best management practice guides similar to those of O’Hare et al.7,  Massachusetts Department of Energy Resources19 and the Cannabis  Sustainability Working Group20. The results of this work can also  help inform policies such as the recent California Statewide Codes  and Standards Enhancement Program proposal21, which would  
Long Beach, CA 
Phoenix, AZ 
St. Louis, MO 
Anchorage, AK 
Denver, CO 
require all indoor cultivation to switch to light-emitting diode lights  
New York, NY 
Fig. 3 | Sensitivity analysis of ACH. Impact of ACH on GHG emissions  from indoor cannabis cultivation for the same ten locations displayed in  Fig. 2. The baseline assumption for this study was 30 ACH, shown in red. 
intensities for cannabis plants can be 50–200 times higher than a  typical office setting and are run for 12, 18 or 24hours, depend ing on the stage of the plant life cycle10. In all locations analysed,  indoor lighting requirements were held constant and therefore the  required annual kilowatt hours (kWh) of electricity are constant.  However, the GHG emissions associated with electricity production  vary more than sixfold as a result of geographically varying elec tric grid mixes, as shown in Fig. 1d. These variations in grid GHG  emissions are most clearly observed in Fig. 2 between Kaneohe Bay,  HI, where the grid mix is largely oil based (805 gCO2e kWh–1), and  Long Beach, CA, where natural gas and solar power are much more  prevalent (238 gCO2e kWh–1). 
Lastly, supplemental CO2 contributes significantly to overall GHG  emissions and does so equally across all locations analysed as it is  a fixed input that is independent of geography. CO2 is introduced  into the indoor grow environment to increase plant photosynthetic  activity, therefore allowing plants to reach maturity sooner17. In these  results, the contributing GHG emissions from the introduction of  gaseous CO2 is not from the CO2 itself, but rather from the production  processes associated with the compression of the gas into liquid form  and subsequent storage within a cylinder. The sourced CO2 gas itself  is obtained free of environmental burden as it is typically received as  a byproduct of another process, such as ammonia production13. It was  also assumed that if the cannabis industry were not using the CO2, it  would be released into the atmosphere and therefore the physical CO2 gas itself does not count as a penalty to the cannabis facility. 
The results presented in Fig. 2 indicate that more than 80% of  the GHG emissions for these locations are generated by practices  that are non-traditional for agricultural products. Traditional agri cultural cropping systems typically see the largest GHG emissions  from practices associated with land preparation and management  or fertilizer, but for indoor cannabis these values are on average less  than 5% of the total18. This is not to say that values from these tradi tional practices are lower in indoor cannabis cultivation, but that the  significant energy required to create an artificial climate for plants  indoors causes cannabis to be extremely GHG emissions intensive. 
Interpretation for improved decision making 
The detailed results from this work enable specific recommenda tions on how the environmental burden of indoor cannabis cultiva tion can be reduced through engineering solutions as well as policy.  
by 2023, or House Bill 143822 in Illinois, which limits lighting inten sities and requires producers to commit to using high-efficiency  HVAC equipment. With the quantitative GHG emissions results  from this work, best management guides should include practices  to specifically reduce GHG emissions from HVAC operations,  high-intensity grow lights and supplemental CO2 as these are the  
largest contributors in the majority of US locations. In addition to holistic process changes, an uncertainty assessment  through sensitivity analysis was performed to identify individual  input parameters that result in large changes to GHG emissions in  response to variation of an input value. The results indicate that the  most sensitive variable is plant yield (kg of dried flower per plant),  which was foreseeable as GHG emission results are presented on  this basis (see Supplementary Fig. 5 for full results). Besides plant  yield, ACH is the next most sensitive variable as this parameter is  directly coupled with HVAC energy requirements and supplemen tal CO2 amounts. In this work, 30ACH was selected and held con stant for all hours of operation within the indoor cannabis growth  model on the basis of a literature survey, which is summarized in  Supplementary Table 1. Further investigation into this high-impact  variable indicates that varying ACH from 10 to 60 can result in a  GHG emissions difference of more than 230%, depending on geo graphic location (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 11 for full results).  It is also important to note that choosing the minimum ACH for  each location may not necessarily be optimal as moisture needs to  be removed from grow rooms to avoid mould and ultimately loss  of product. Furthermore, the relationship between ACH and GHG  emissions from indoor cannabis is non-linear in many locations due  to varying equipment use and therefore energy demand. Specifically,  the use of supplemental equipment declines on moving from 20 to  30ACH because the indoor climate requirements are met by the  increased supply of fresh air conditioned through HVAC equip ment. Therefore, ACH warrants particular attention when devel oping best management practice guides for individual cultivation  facilities or geographic regions. The results of the sensitivity analysis  also identify temperature and humidity ranges, typically measured  in facilities as vapour pressure deficit, and CO2 concentrations as  the next three most sensitive variables to overall GHG emissions.  All three of these parameters are coupled with ACH, and although  they would benefit from individual optimization, they reiterate the  importance of optimizing ACH. 
The results of this work also identify geographic regions within  the United States and in individual states where indoor canna bis cultivation would have low GHG emissions. Federal restric tions limit the transport of cannabis across states and therefore a  US-wide geographic optimization of growth locations is not fea sible. However, in most US states, the intrastate transport of can nabis product is legal and therefore, if indoor cultivation is to  remain within that state, this work highlights locations for indoor  cannabis cultivation that would lead to lower GHG emissions.  
Nature Sustainability | www.nature.com/natsustain
Nature Sustainability Analysis 
These geographic variations are most noticeable in Colorado,  where the mountainous locations of Leadville, Aspen, Gunnison  and Alamosa lead to significantly more GHG emissions than loca tions on the plains of Pueblo, Trinidad or Denver. For example, the  practice of growing cannabis in Leadville leads to 19% more GHG  emissions than in Pueblo. The savings in GHG emissions from  moving indoor cultivation to Pueblo and away from Leadville are  likely to be much greater than the GHG emissions of transport 
ing the final product to retail locations in Leadville. These results  indicate that individual states can optimize their indoor cultivation  locations to reduce GHG emissions. Laws may need to change for  this geographic optimization to occur, such as the previously men 
tioned law in Colorado that stated cultivation and retail facilities be  collocated. For states that have yet to legalize, flexibility with col location requirements could improve the GHG emissions from the  standpoint of intrastate geographic optimization. 
Additional conclusions from this work can help inform policy  for states where cannabis cultivation is not yet legal. For these states,  developing policy to encourage greenhouse and outdoor cultiva tion can drastically reduce GHG emissions by avoiding the prac tice of indoor cannabis cultivation altogether. We acknowledge that  shifting cannabis cultivation outdoors is not free of environmen tal burden as the literature has shown several concerns, includ ing increased irrigation, excessive use of pesticides and nutrient  run-off8,23. Additionally, switching to greenhouse and outdoor prac tices requires appropriate regulation to avoid the potential encour agement of illicit practices that historically have led to additional  environmental burden, such as illegal water diversion and defor estation8,23. There are also concerns over greenhouse and outdoor  cultivation associated with security, the inability to achieve multiple  harvests per year and a lack of consistent product. 
Although there are many hurdles associated with shifting can nabis growth to legal and well-regulated greenhouse and outdoor  cultivation practices, preliminary investigations into the potential  difference in GHG emissions when switching to greenhouse and  outdoor cultivation practices indicated reductions of 42 and 96%,  respectively6,7. It is important to note that these reports are limited  in scope and resolution as the GHG emissions are based primarily  on electricity consumption through monthly bills. Therefore, the  current state of the industry would benefit from understanding the  true GHG emissions of greenhouse and outdoor cultivation at a  similar resolution to the work presented here to allow real com 
parison between the three cultivation methods. The results of this  study affirm that more than 80% of the GHG emissions from all  indoor cannabis locations assessed are caused by practices directly  linked to indoor cultivation methods, specifically indoor environ 
mental control, high-intensity grow lights and the supply of CO2 for increased plant growth. If indoor cannabis cultivation were to  be fully converted to outdoor production, these preliminary esti mates show that the state of Colorado, for example, would see a  reduction of more than 1.3% in the state’s annual GHG emissions  (2.1MtCO2e)24. These GHG emissions are on a par with entire  sectors within the state, such as coal mining, waste management  and industrial processes, which are responsible for 1.8, 4.2 and  4.5MtCO2e annually, respectively24. 
The conclusive results quantified in this study indicate that cul tivating cannabis indoors leads to considerable GHG emissions  regardless of where it is grown in the United States. These findings  illustrate the need for change within the rapidly growing cannabis  industry to reduce GHG emissions from indoor cultivation. 
Methods 
Model scope. Indoor cannabis cultivation facilities vary in the way they are built  and operate, depending on existing building infrastructure, codes and permitting,  and geographic considerations pertaining to HVAC equipment selection. Further  variation is seen from the specifc strain of cannabis being cultivated, leading to  
Nature Sustainability | www.nature.com/natsustain
diferent desired indoor cultivation climates. Modelled here is a representative  facility of common indoor cannabis cultivation practices established through  literature research and industry communication. Te system boundary of the  
model represents a cradle-to-gate framework, encompassing operations associated  with the warehouse-like facility to support indoor cannabis cultivation, including  the necessary energy and material inputs as well as waste from the facility  (Supplementary Fig. 6). Downstream activities, such as the transportation of the  fnal product to point of sale, packaging, use and end of life, were not considered. 
Model development and resolution. The modelled indoor cultivation facility  operation includes the four primary cannabis stages of life, namely clone,  vegetative, flower and curing, with permanent rooms established for each to house  the necessary equipment and maintain the required growing environments. The  operations are similar to an assembly line because established room environments  are maintained constant while plants rotate through them, depending on the stage  of life (Supplementary Fig. 7). The length of each plant stage was modelled using  average durations from Colorado indoor growers, that is, 22, 50, 57 and 14days for  clone, vegetative, flower and cure, respectively1. Because flowering is the longest  stage, it creates a bottleneck effect. This effect was accommodated by determining  when all other stages of life should start and end relative to flowering, resulting in  an average of 6.2harvests per year. Additionally, the maximum number of cannabis  plants flowering in the allotted grow space was limited, representing a conservative  GHG emissions estimate as the results are presented on the basis of yield (per kg of  dried flower). Once the grow room timing was established, the model determined  what climate modifications were needed to maintain a steady cultivation  environment based on the required indoor air temperature, humidity and the  outside conditions of the simulated location. Supplementary Fig. 8 illustrates  a typical layout for a single grow room demonstrating the array of equipment  necessary to perform these climate modifications. 
The first series of model calculations quantified the necessary energy to modify  outdoor air conditions, performed by HVAC, to meet the required temperature  and humidity ranges of the grow room. Existing outdoor air conditions on an  hourly resolution were obtained from typical meteorological year data sets from  the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)11. Each stage of plant life  requires different indoor environmental conditions, and the desired temperature  and humidity ranges that were modelled are listed in Supplementary Table 3.  The HVAC energy calculations were based on the psychrometric principles of  thermodynamics while accounting for the appropriate ambient pressure relative to  location elevation. The air-exchange rate, modelled at a fixed rate of 30ACH for  all hours of grow operation, was obtained through a literature survey, with values  ranging from 12 to 60ACH (Supplementary Table 1). The resulting natural gas  and electricity consumption were determined from the modelled HVAC energy  requirements assuming a combustion heating efficiency of 80% (ref. 25) and an  electric cooling coefficient of performance of 3.25 (ref. 26). 
The model then calculated temperature and humidity values for the mixing of  delivered HVAC air with existing inside growth conditions as well as operations  occurring in the grow room. Operations occurring inside included added heat  from high-intensity grow lights, heat loss or gain through the walls and added  moisture from plant evapotranspiration27 (Supplementary Table 4). Calculations  of these events were based on inside heat transfer and the thermodynamic  methodologies of greenhouse models found within the literature with appropriate  modifications made to represent warehouse-like facilities27,28. The model quantified  the resulting temperature and humidity values inside the grow room, which were  used to determine whether supplemental environmental control equipment,  located inside grow rooms, was needed to keep the inside climate within the  conditions listed in Supplementary Table 3. The supplemental equipment modelled  was assumed to be electrical and included air conditioners, dehumidifiers and  heaters. Further details of the energetic calculations for climate modification  are provided in Supplementary Method 1 and Supplementary Fig. 9. Additional  electric-based equipment was modelled, including high-intensity grow lights,  circulating fans (which were assumed to be on anytime plants are in a grow room),  water pumps and water heaters (Supplementary Table 5). The model determines,  on an hourly resolution, the annual electricity and natural gas required to cultivate  cannabis indoors at each location (Supplementary Table 12). 
Beyond electricity and natural gas, material inputs, such as supplied CO2,  water, fertilizer, pesticides and fungicides, were also modelled. Supplied CO2 was introduced into grow rooms when the high-intensity grow lights were on,  and concentrations were held at the values listed in Supplementary Table 3  throughout air exchanges. Water was applied by drip irrigation at an average rate  of 3.8 l per plant per day29. Pumping power for water delivery was modelled at a  rate of 0.99Whl–1 (refs. 10,30). Nutrients, in the form of nitrogen, phosphorus and  potassium fertilizers, were supplied through the drip irrigation system in varying  amounts and times (the amounts and schedule are provided in Supplementary  Table 6)31. Cumulatively, the energy and material inventory derived from the  indoor cannabis model serves as the foundation for the environmental assessment. 
Environmental analysis. The indoor cannabis cultivation model accounts for all  operational energy and materials needed to grow plants from infancy through to  the dried retail-ready product in an indoor, warehouse-like setting. The required  
Analysis Nature Sustainability 
energy primarily stems from HVAC equipment and lighting, and is provided  through electricity or natural gas. The materials inventory consists of inputs such  as water, fertilizers, pesticides, fungicides and supplemental CO2. The energy  and material inventory was translated into GHG emissions through attributional  LCA methodologies32,33, with the results presented for a cradle-to-gate, per kg of  dried flower, system boundary (Supplementary Fig. 6). All GHG emissions were  allocated to the dried flower assuming 6.2harvests per year1 and an assumed yield  of 0.44 kg of dried flower per plant10. 
From the indoor cannabis model, electricity was quantified for 1,011 US  locations and the resulting annual kilowatt hours were cross-referenced with  geographically specific GHG emissions data to appropriately capture variations  in electrical grid mix (see Supplementary Fig. 10 for all US locations analysed).  Geographically resolved GHG emissions data for electricity generation were  obtained from the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA‘s) Emissions and  Generation Resource Integrated Database (eGRID12; Supplementary Table 7 and  Supplementary Fig. 11). Electric grid GHG emissions data were generated using  the eGRID methodology of combining region-specific total output GHG emission  rates with grid gross losses, accounting for transmission and distribution line  losses. Natural gas GHG emissions were not considered geographically specific and  were therefore held constant across all locations as a combination of production  GHG emissions from ecoinvent v3.4 (ref. 13) and combustion GHG emissions from  NREL’s US LCI Database14. The production GHG emissions system boundary  encompasses manufacturing, pressurization and distribution, and losses such  as flaring, venting and fugitive GHG emissions up to obtaining natural gas at a  service station. Additional energy for delivery from service station to cannabis  facilities was assumed negligible. All GHG emissions data from ecoinvent v3.4 and  the US LCI were equated to CO2e values by methods outlined in the EPA’s Tool  for Reduction and Assessment of Chemicals and Other Environmental Impacts  (TRACI) version v2.1 (ref. 34), which uses the same 100-year global warming  potential factors as the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change35. 
Materials that required physical transport to the cultivation facility, and thus  transportation GHG emissions accounting, included soil, fertilizers, fungicides,  pesticides and bottled CO2. GHG emissions data for cradle-to-gate production  and transportation were sourced from ecoinvent v3.4 (ref. 13) and converted  into CO2e values using the TRACI v2.1 methodology34 (Supplementary Tables  8 and 9). Distances from the point of manufacturing to distribution centres,  distribution centres to small retail and small retail to cannabis grow facilities  were modelled as 500mi (805 km), 50mi (80 km) and 10mi (16 km), respectively,  for all locations. GHG emissions accounting for water was also cradle-to-gate,  including the necessary pipeline infrastructure to be delivered to the cultivation  facility. At the end of grow facility operations, several states that have legalized  cannabis cultivation require disposal of all organic waste, including the remaining  plant portion that is not product, soils and fertilizers. These waste products were  modelled as transported to a municipal solid waste (MSW) landfill. Transportation  of organic waste to the MSW landfill and heavy-equipment operations GHG  emissions data were obtained from ecoinvent v3.4 (ref. 13), whereas landfill organic  decomposition GHG emissions were obtained from Morelli and Cashman36 and Lee et al.37. 
One component of the GHG emissions assessment, carbon accounting, is  worthy of further discussion to clarify the environmental burden assignment.  The production of supplemental bottled CO2 stems from compressing a gaseous  form to a liquid form and then bottling it. The gaseous form of CO2 is a necessary  byproduct of ammonia production. As a result, it was assumed that without  bottling, the CO2 would be released into the atmosphere. Therefore, any CO2 not  used by the cannabis plants and released into the atmosphere does not contribute  a burden to the cannabis facility and is instead attributed to ammonia production  that is outside the system boundary of this study. Thus, the only contributing  GHG emissions from bottled CO2 are a result of the upstream materials and  energy needed to transform the CO2 gas into a liquid and deliver it to the facility.  A portion of the bottled CO2 is considered to be stored by the plant product  (dried flower) based on the assumed system boundary and the final carbon  content of this biomass modelled as 48% (ref. 36). The carbon associated with the  remaining cannabis plant matter and soil that are transported to the MSW landfill  was modelled as (1) decomposing organic material leading to methane (CH4)  and CO2 generation or (2) non-degradable, or inert, carbon that is stored in the  landfill. The CH4 generated was modelled as collected and combusted to form  CO2, oxidized to form CO2 or released into the atmosphere as CH4 (ref. 37). The  collected and combusted and oxidized CH4 streams were not counted toward GHG  emissions as they are of biogenic origin and therefore balance with the carbon  uptake by the plant biomass. The only GHG emissions contribution in the system  boundary comes from the CH4 portion of degradation that is not collected and was  accounted for as having radiative forcing 25 times that of CO2 (ref. 35). Stored CO2 was accounted for as a negative GHG emission toward the overall GHG emissions  from indoor cannabis production. The details of carbon accounting can be found  in Supplementary Table 10. 
There are additional materials required to operate an indoor grow facility,  such as drip irrigation materials, plastic pots for various grow stages, cleaning  supplies, latex gloves and masks for employees. It was determined that the amount  
of each material required to make a 1% contribution to overall GHG emissions  would greatly exceed the amount of material that cannabis facilities could feasibly  consume, and therefore these GHG emissions were omitted. The GHG emissions  associated with the construction of the indoor growth facility were not included  as it was assumed that due to collocated grow and retail facilities, the warehouse  would have been previously constructed and require minimal modifications.  Additionally, the embodied GHG emissions associated with infrastructure  materials were not included as they were assumed to be minimal over the operating  lifetime of the indoor cannabis facility38. 
Cumulative GHG emissions were obtained for all 1,011 locations across the  United States (Supplementary Table 12) and serve as the foundation for the US map  presented in Fig. 1a. Location data and GHG emissions estimates were interpolated  
and displayed using Esri ArcGIS Pro v2.4 (ref. 39). Values were interpolated using  the kriging method, with a spherical model and lag size of 25,000m, and masked  to the boundary of the United States. GHG emissions values were interpolated two  ways: first, continuously throughout the United States and second, masked to each  eGRID region. The interpolated surfaces for each region were then mosaicked  together for the entire United States. All calculations were carried out with a cell  size of 5,000m in the North America Albers equal area projection. 
Model validation. A baseline comparison of the foundational energetic loads was  made by configuring the indoor cannabis model as a standard office building to  compare energy requirements with those reported in the literature. Configuring  the model to a standard office building included changing lighting intensities,  air exchanges and internal processes, for example, lowering the heat from lights  and removing humidity from plants while also adding heat from computers and  occupants. The resulting energetic intensities, measured as energy use indices,  yield a median value of 456kWhm–2 yr–1, which can be compared with the value  provided by Energy Star for commercial office buildings of 581kWhm–2 yr–1 (ref. 40).  Modelling modifications were made to simulate a laboratory facility having ACH  values closer to those found in indoor cannabis facilities. The resulting energy use  indices yielded a medium of 937kWhm–2 yr–1, which compares with the Energy  Star median value of 1,004kWhm–2 yr–1 (ref. 41). These comparative energetic  metrics identify that the foundational thermodynamic and heat transfer  methodologies are accurate. 
Further model comparisons were performed for the energy intensities  observed in the literature. In these comparisons a specific energy intensity,  lighting, was observed to require 2,246 kWhm–2 of growing space and was  validated at 2,460 kWhm–2 based on model results10. In addition to lighting loads,  
a comparison of overarching holistic values was performed through monthly  electric bills, energy and GHG emissions of cannabis grow facilities. Electricity  intensities from the indoor cannabis cultivation model ranged from US$35.96  to US$105.22 per grow cycle per m2 of grow facility, similar to values reported  in the literature (US$15.50–121.56 per grow cycle per m2 grow facility)4,10,19.  As previously mentioned, the differences in energy and GHG emissions from  growing cannabis indoors, in a greenhouse and outdoors were analysed in some  preliminary investigations6,7. Although these studies are limited in that the only  source of energy considered was electricity, the results do provide a comparison  metric. The range of electricity consumption for indoor production in the two  reports is 1,270–6,100 kWhkg–1 of flower produced annually and the results of  this work are in the range 1,817–4,576 kWhkg–1 of flower produced annually6,7.  Additionally, both reports provide values for GHG emissions from electric-based  operations ranging between 562 and 3,000 kgCO2e kg–1 and the results of this work  range between 541 and 3,452 kgCO2e kg–1 produced annually. Mills10 also reports  4,600 kgCO2e kg–1 final product, which is within the range observed in this study of  2,283–5,184 kgCO2e kg–1. 
Limitations. We acknowledge that limitations and uncertainty exist within this  body of work. Simplifications and assumptions were made primarily due to limited  data availability and are most prevalent within the geographic considerations,  transportation and system boundary. However, further refinement would likely  lead to an increase in overall GHG emissions if modelling resolution improved,  as all modelling inputs and assumptions were chosen to represent either average  or conservative practice. The geographic resolution included in this analysis was  limited to meteorological data and electric grid mix. However, the electric demand  and variations in grid mix have the largest geographic discrepancy, and therefore  improved resolution is expected to have a minor impact on overall GHG emissions.  Areas of the work that would benefit from improved geographic resolution are  natural gas production and distribution and material transportation distances.  The system boundary considered here is cradle-to-gate and ends at the point of  finished cannabis flower. However, expansion of the system boundary to include  transportation to retail, packaging, use and end of life would improve the findings  of this work. Additionally, several products can be manufactured from cannabis,  and each product supply chain would yield different GHG emissions results. 
Preliminary work was performed to investigate the uncertainty within the  model, including a sensitivity analysis, as described previously. The results  indicated that air exchanges, temperature and humidity ranges, and bottled CO2 amount were the most sensitive variables to GHG emissions and therefore warrant  particular attention when designing and optimizing individual indoor facilities. 
Nature Sustainability | www.nature.com/natsustain
Nature Sustainability Analysis 
Data availability 
All data analysed or generated during this study are included either in this  published article (and its supplementary material) or are available at GitHub at  https://github.com/haisummers/research. Source data are provided with this paper. 
Code availability 
The custom computer code used to generate the results of this study, supporting  data files for the code and data results from the code can be located through  GitHub at https://github.com/haisummers/research. 
Received: 13 March 2020; Accepted: 4 February 2021;    Published: xx xx xxxx 
References 
1. Córdova, L., Humphreys, H., Amend, C., Burack, J. & Lambert, K. Marijuana  Enforcement Division - 2018 Annual Update (Colorado Department of  Revenue, 2019). 
2. Te U.S. Cannabis Report - 2019 Industry Outlook (New Frontier Data, 2019). 3. National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Trends in Prevalence of Various  Drugs for Ages 12 or Older, Ages 12 to 17, Ages 18 to 25, and Ages 26 or Older;  2016–2018 (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2018). 
4. Anderson, B., Policzer, J., Loughney, E. & Rodriguez, K. Energy Use in the  Colorado Cannabis Industry - Fall 2018 Report (Te Cannabis Conservancy,  2018). 
5. State of the Cannabis Cultivation Industry (Cannabis Business Times, 2020). 6. Te 2018 Cannabis Energy Report (New Frontier Data, 2018). 7. O’Hare, M., Sanchez, D. L. & Alstone, P. Environmental Risks and  
Opportunities in Cannabis Cultivation (BOTEC Analysis Corporation, 2013). 8. Warren, G. S. Regulating pot to save the polar bear: energy and climate  impacts of the marijuana industry. Columbia J. Environ. Law 40,  385–432 (2015). 
9. Crandall, K. A Chronic Problem: Taming Energy Costs and Impacts from  Marijuana Cultivation (EQ Research, 2016). 
10. Mills, E. Te carbon footprint of indoor cannabis production. Energy Policy 46, 58–67 (2012). 
11. Wilcox, S. & Marion, W. Users Manual for TMY3 Data Sets (National  Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2008). 
12. Ofce of Atmospheric Programs Clean Air Markets Division Te Emissions &  Generation Resource Integrated Database (eGRID 2018) (US EPA, 2020). 13. Wernet, G. et al. Te ecoinvent database version 3 (part I): overview and  methodology. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 21, 1218–1230 (2015). 
14. U.S. Life Cycle Inventory Database (National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  accessed 2020); https://www.lcacommons.gov/lca-collaboration/National_ Renewable_Energy_Laboratory/USLCI/datasets 
15. ASHRAE Standard 62.2-2016. Ventilation and Acceptable Indoor Air Quality in  Low-Rise Residential Buildings (American Society of Heating, Refrigerating  and Air-Conditioning Engineers, 2016). 
16. Guidelines for Environmental Infection Control in Health-Care Facilities (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2003); https://www.cdc.gov/ infectioncontrol/guidelines/environmental/appendix/air.html 
17. Chandra, S., Lata, H. & Khan, I. A. Photosynthetic response of Cannabis  sativa L., an important medicinal plant, to elevate levels of CO2. Physiol. Mol.  Biol. Plants 17, 291–295 (2011). 
18. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks Report No. EPA  430-R-20-002 (US EPA, 2020). 
19. Ofce of Energy and Environmental Afairs Cannabis Energy Overview and  Recommendations (Massachusetts Department of Energy Resources, 2018). 20. Cannabis Sustainability Working Group Cannabis Environmental Best  Management Practices Guide (Denver Department of Public Health &  Environment, 2018). 
21. Booth, K., Becking, S., Barker, G., Silverberg, S. & Sullivan, J. Controlled  Environment Horticulture Report No. 2022-NR-COV-PROC4-F (California  Energy Code, 2020). 
22. Madigan, M. J. Illinois House Bill 1348 (Illinois General Assembly, 2019). 23. Carah, J. K. et al. High time for conservation: adding the environment to the  debate on marijuana liberalization. BioScience 65, 822–829 (2015). 24. Heald, S. Colorado Greenhouse Gas Inventory 2019 Including Projections to  2020 & 2030 (Colorado Department of Public Health & Environment, 2019). 25. Çengel, Y. A. & Boles, M. A. Termodynamics: An Engineering Approach (McGraw-Hill Education, 2015). 
Nature Sustainability | www.nature.com/natsustain
26. ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2019. Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise  Residential Buildings (American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and  Air-Conditioning Engineers, 2019). 
27. Fitz-Rodríguez, E. et al. Dynamic modeling and simulation of greenhouse  environments under several scenarios: a web-based application. Comput.  Electron. Agric. 70, 105–116 (2009). 
28. Joudi, K. A. & Farhan, A. A. A dynamic model and an experimental study for  the internal air and soil temperatures in an innovative greenhouse. Energy  Convers. Manag. 91, 76–82 (2015). 
29. Steinfeld, A. Cannabis & Water Regulation (Te Water Report, 2019);  https://www.bhfs.com/Templates/media/fles/TWR%23181.pdf 30. Nemecek, T. & Kägi, T. Life Cycle Inventories of Agricultural Production  Systems (Ecoinvent, 2007); https://db.ecoinvent.org/reports/15_Agriculture.pdf 31. Soil Feeding Schedule (FoxFarm Soil & Fertilizer Company, 2019); https:// foxfarm.com/feeding-schedules 
32. Environmental Management – Life Cycle Assessment – Principles and Framework ISO 14040:2006 (International Organization for Standardization, 2006). 33. Environmental Management – Life Cycle Assessment – Requirements and  Guidelines ISO 14044:2006 (International Organization for Standardization,  2006). 
34. Bare, J. Tool for the Reduction and Assessment of chemical and Other  Environmental Impacts (TRACI) version 2.1 User’s Guide (US EPA, 2012). 35. IPCC Climate Change 2007: Te Physical Science Basis (eds Solomon, S. et al.)  (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007). 
36. Morelli, B. & Cashman, S. Environmental Life Cycle Assessment and Cost  Analysis of Bath, NY Wastewater Treatment Plant: Potential Upgrade  Implications 3–9 (US EPA, 2017). 
37. Lee, U., Han, J. & Wang, M. Evaluation of landfll gas emissions from  municipal solid waste landflls for the life-cycle analysis of waste-to-energy  pathways. J. Clean. Prod. 166, 335–342 (2017). 
38. Guggemos, A. A. & Horvath, A. Comparison of environmental efects of  steel- and concrete-framed buildings. J. Infrastruct. Syst. 11, 93–101 (2005). 39. ArcGIS Pro v2.4 (Environmental Systems Research Institute, 2019); https:// www.esri.com/en-us/home 
40. Data Trends: Energy Use in Ofce Buildings (Energy Star Portfolio Manager,  2016); https://www.energystar.gov/buildings/tools-and-resources/ datatrends-energy-use-ofce-buildings 
41. U.S. Energy Use Intensity by Property Type (Energy Star Portfolio Manager,  2018); https://portfoliomanager.energystar.gov/pdf/reference/US%20 National%20Median%20Table.pdf 
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge the Colorado State University GIS Centroid for generating the US  results maps, specifically E. Tulanowski, S. Linn and C. Norris. We also acknowledge  individuals for their continued support in reviewing this work, namely D. Browning, D.  Quinn, J. Barlow, D. Trinko, K. DeRose and W. Stainsby. 
Author contributions 
J.C.Q. conceived the study. H.M.S., J.C.Q. and E.S. designed the study. H.M.S. and E.S.  developed the HVAC modelling approach and LCA framework. H.M.S. developed  the code, performed the analysis, wrote the initial manuscript and designed figures,  excluding the US maps, with contributions from E.S. and J.C.Q. All authors contributed  to the interpretation of the results, discussion, revisions and messaging of the paper. 
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
Additional information 
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material  available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-021-00691-w. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.C.Q. Peer review information Nature Sustainability thanks Melissa Bilec, Michael Martin  and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of  this work. 
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in  published maps and institutional affiliations. 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2021